# Further Reading

[Chapter 8, “Compound Statements,”](https://fpy.li/18-27) in _The Python Language Reference_ says pretty much everything there is to say about `else` clauses in `if`, `for`, `while`, and `try` statements. Regarding Pythonic usage of `try/except`, with or without `else`, Raymond Hettinger has a brilliant answer to the question [“Is it a good practice to use try-except-else in Python?”](https://fpy.li/18-31) in StackOverflow. [_Python in a Nutshell_](https://fpy.li/pynut3), 3rd ed., by Martelli et al., has a chapter about exceptions with an excellent discussion of the EAFP style, crediting computing pioneer Grace Hopper for coining the phrase, “It’s easier to ask forgiveness than permission.”

_The_ _Python Standard Library_, Chapter 4, “Built-in Types,” has a section devoted to [“Context Manager Types”](https://fpy.li/18-32). The `__enter__/__exit__` special methods are also documented in _The Python Language Reference_ in [“With Statement Context Managers”](https://fpy.li/18-33). Context managers were introduced in [PEP 343—The “with” Statement](https://fpy.li/pep343).

Raymond Hettinger highlighted the `with` statement as a “winning language feature” in his [PyCon US 2013 keynote](https://fpy.li/18-29). He also showed some interesting applications of context managers in his talk, [“Transforming Code into Beautiful, Idiomatic Python”](https://fpy.li/18-35), at the same conference.

Jeff Preshing’s blog post [“The Python _with_ Statement by Example”](https://fpy.li/18-36) is interesting for the examples using context managers with the `pycairo` graphics library.

The `contextlib.ExitStack` class is based on an original idea by Nikolaus Rath, who wrote a short post explaining why its useful: [“On the Beauty of Python’s ExitStack”](https://fpy.li/18-37). In that text, Rath submits that `ExitStack` is similar but more flexible than the `defer` statement in Go—which I think is one of the best ideas in that language.

Beazley and Jones devised context managers for very different purposes in their _[Python Cookbook,](https://fpy.li/pycook3)_ 3rd ed. “Recipe 8.3. Making Objects Support the Context-Management Protocol” implements a `LazyConnection` class whose instances are context managers that open and close network connections automatically in `with` blocks. “Recipe 9.22. Defining Context Managers the Easy Way” introduces a context manager for timing code, and another for making transactional changes to a `list` object: within the `with` block, a working copy of the `list` instance is made, and all changes are applied to that working copy. Only when the `with` block completes without an exception, the working copy replaces the original list. Simple and ingenious.

Peter Norvig describes his small Scheme interpreters in the posts [“(How to Write a (Lisp) Interpreter (in Python))”](https://fpy.li/18-38) and [“(An ((Even Better) Lisp) Interpreter (in Python))”](https://fpy.li/18-39). The code for _lis.py_ and _lispy.py_ is the [_norvig/pytudes_](https://fpy.li/18-40) repository. My repository [_fluentpython/lispy_](https://fpy.li/18-41) includes the _mylis_ forks of _lis.py_, updated to Python 3.10, with a nicer REPL, command-line integration, examples, more tests, and references for learning more about Scheme. The best Scheme dialect and environment to learn and experiment is [Racket](https://fpy.li/18-42).

##### Soapbox

Factoring Out the Bread

In his PyCon US 2013 keynote, [“What Makes Python Awesome”](https://fpy.li/18-1), Raymond Hettinger says when he first saw the `with` statement proposal he thought it was “a little bit arcane.” Initially, I had a similar reaction. PEPs are often hard to read, and PEP 343 is typical in that regard.

Then—Hettinger told us—he had an insight: subroutines are the most important invention in the history of computer languages. If you have sequences of operations like A;B;C and P;B;Q, you can factor out B in a subroutine. It’s like factoring out the filling in a sandwich: using tuna with different breads. But what if you want to factor out the bread, to make sandwiches with wheat bread, using a different filling each time? That’s what the `with` statement offers. It’s the complement of the subroutine. Hettinger went on to say:

> The `with` statement is a very big deal. I encourage you to go out and take this tip of the iceberg and drill deeper. You can probably do profound things with the `with` statement. The best uses of it have not been discovered yet. I expect that if you make good use of it, it will be copied into other languages and all future languages will have it. You can be part of discovering something almost as profound as the invention of the subroutine itself.

Hettinger admits he is overselling the `with` statement. Nevertheless, it is a very useful feature. When he used the sandwich analogy to explain how `with` is the complement to the subroutine, many possibilities opened up in my mind.

If you need to convince anyone that Python is awesome, you should watch Hettinger’s keynote. The bit about context managers is from 23:00 to 26:15. But the entire keynote is excellent.

Efficient Recursion with Proper Tail Calls

Standard Scheme implementations are required to provide _proper tail calls_ (PTC), to make iteration through recursion a practical alternative to `while` loops in imperative languages. Some writers refer to PTC as _tail call optimization_ (TCO); for others, TCO is something different. For more details, see [“Tail call”](https://fpy.li/18-44) on Wikipedia and [“Tail call optimization in ECMAScript 6”](https://fpy.li/18-45).

A _tail call_ is when a function returns the result of a function call, which may be the same function or not. The `gcd` examples in [Example 18-10](#ex_gcd_scheme) and [Example 18-11](#ex_gcd_python) make (recursive) tail calls in the _falsy_ branch of the `if`.

On the other hand, this `factorial` does not make a tail call:

```
def
```

The call to `factorial` in the last line is not a tail call because the `return` value is not the result of the recursive call: the result is multiplied by `n` before it is returned.

Here is an alternative that uses a tail call, and is therefore _tail recursive_:

```
def
```

Python does not have PTC, so there’s no advantage in writing tail recursive functions. In this case, the first version is shorter and more readable in my opinion. For real-life uses, don’t forget that Python has `math.factorial`, written in C without recursion. The point is that, even in languages that implement PTC, it does not benefit every recursive function, only those that are carefully written to make tail calls.

If PTC is supported by the language, when the interpreter sees a tail call, it jumps into the body of the called function without creating a new stack frame, saving memory. There are also compiled languages that implement PTC, sometimes as an optimization that can be toggled.

There is no universal consensus about the definition of TCO or the value of PTC in languages that were not designed as functional languages from the ground up, like Python or JavaScript. In functional languages, PTC is an expected feature, not merely an optimization that is nice to have. If a language has no iteration mechanism other than recursion, then PTC is necessary for practical usage. Norvig’s [_lis.py_](https://fpy.li/18-46) does not implement PTC, but his more elaborate [_lispy.py_](https://fpy.li/18-16) interpreter does.

The Case Against Proper Tail Calls in Python and JavaScript

CPython does not implement PTC, and probably never will. Guido van Rossum wrote [“Final Words on Tail Calls”](https://fpy.li/18-48) to explain why. To summarize, here is a key passage from his post:

> Personally, I think it is a fine feature for some languages, but I don’t think it fits Python: the elimination of stack traces for some calls but not others would certainly confuse many users, who have not been raised with tail call religion but might have learned about call semantics by tracing through a few calls in a debugger.

In 2015, PTC was included in the ECMAScript 6 standard for JavaScript. As of October 2021, the interpreter in [WebKit implements it](https://fpy.li/18-49). WebKit is used by Safari. The JS interpreters in every other major browser don’t have PTC, and neither does Node.js, as it relies on the V8 engine that Google maintains for Chrome. Transpilers and polyfills targeting JS, like TypeScript, ClojureScript, and Babel, don’t support PTC either, according to this [“ECMAScript 6 compatibility table”](https://fpy.li/18-50).

I’ve seen several explanations for the rejection of PTC by the implementers, but the most common is the same that Guido van Rossum mentioned: PTC makes debugging harder for everyone, while benefiting only a minority of people who’d rather use recursion for iteration. For details, see [“What happened to proper tail calls in JavaScript?”](https://fpy.li/18-51) by Graham Marlow.

There are cases when recursion is the best solution, even in Python without PTC. In a [previous post](https://fpy.li/18-52) on the subject, Guido wrote:

> […] a typical Python implementation allows 1000 recursions, which is plenty for non-recursively written code and for code that recourses to traverse, for example, a typical parse tree, but not enough for a recursively written loop over a large list.

I agree with Guido and the majority of JS implementers: PTC is not a good fit for Python or JavaScript. The lack of PTC is the main restriction for writing Python programs in a functional style—more than the limited `lambda` syntax.

If you are curious to see how PTC works in an interpreter with less features (and less code) than Norvig’s _lispy.py_, check out [_mylis_2_](https://fpy.li/18-53). The trick starts with the infinite loop in `evaluate` and the code in the `case` for function calls: that combination makes the intepreter jump into the body of the next `Procedure` without calling `evaluate` recursively during a tail call. Those little interpreters demonstrate the power of abstraction: even though Python does not implement PTC, it’s possible and not very hard to write an interpreter, in Python, that does implement PTC. I learned how to do it reading Peter Norvig’s code. Thanks for sharing it, professor!

Norvig’s Take on evaluate() with Pattern Matching

I shared the code for the Python 3.10 version of _lis.py_ with Peter Norvig. He liked the example using pattern matching, but suggested a different solution: instead of the guards I wrote, he would have exactly one `case` per keyword, and have tests within each `case`, to provide more specific `SyntaxError` messages—for example, when a body is empty. This would also make the guard in `case [func_exp, *args] if func_exp not in KEYWORDS:` unnecessary, as every keyword would be handled before the `case` for function calls.

I’ll probably follow Norvig’s advice when I add more functionality to [_mylis_](https://fpy.li/18-54). But the way I structured `evaluate` in [Example 18-17](#ex_evaluate_match) has some didactic advantages for this book: the example parallels the implementation with `if/elif/…` ([Example 2-11](ch02.html#ex_norvigs_eval)), the `case` clauses demonstrate more features of pattern matching, and the code is more concise.

[^1]: ; the part about `with` starts at 23:00 and ends at 26:15.

[^2]: ` was often necessary to determine what clean-up action would be required.

[^3]:  in _Lib/contextlib.py_ in Python 3.10.

[^4]:  This tip is quoted literally from a comment by Leonardo Rochael, one of the tech reviewers for this book. Nicely said, Leo!

[^5]:  At least I and the other technical reviewers didn’t know it until Caleb Hattingh told us. Thanks, Caleb!

[^6]: ` that don’t behave at all like function calls.

[^7]: .

[^8]: , supports strings as a data type, as well as advanced features like syntactic macros, continuations, and proper tail calls. However, _lispy.py_ is almost three times longer than _lis.py_—and much harder to understand.

[^9]: , which is unresolved as I review this chapter. `ChainMap` is annotated as `MutableMapping`, but the type hint in the `maps` attribute says it’s a list of `Mapping`, indirectly making the whole `ChainMap` immutable as far as Mypy is concerned.

[^10]:  until we enter a complete expression or statement that can be evaluated. _mylis_ also handles a few errors gracefully, but it’s still easy to crash. It’s not nearly as robust as Python’s REPL.

[^11]: , a.k.a. SICP or the “Wizard Book.” Coding in a functional style can take us very far without the state changes that are typical of imperative and object-oriented programming.

[^12]: , the Unicode Consortium adopted that spelling because of “preferences expressed by the Greek National Body.”

[^13]:  Watching the discussion in the python-dev mailing list I thought one reason why `else` was rejected was the lack of consensus on how to indent it within `match`: should `else` be indented at the same level as `match`, or at the same level as `case`?

[^14]: .