# Chapter 2. An Array of Sequences

> As you may have noticed, several of the operations mentioned work equally for texts, lists and tables. Texts, lists and tables together are called ‘trains’. [...] The `FOR` command also works generically on trains.
> 
> Leo Geurts, Lambert Meertens, and Steven Pembertonm, _ABC Programmer’s Handbook_[^1]

Before creating Python, Guido was a contributor to the ABC language—a 10-year research project to design a programming environment for beginners. ABC introduced many ideas we now consider “Pythonic”: generic operations on different types of sequences, built-in tuple and mapping types, structure by indentation, strong typing without variable declarations, and more. It’s no accident that Python is so user-friendly.

Python inherited from ABC the uniform handling of sequences. Strings, lists, byte sequences, arrays, XML elements, and database results share a rich set of common operations, including iteration, slicing, sorting, and concatenation.

Understanding the variety of sequences available in Python saves us from reinventing the wheel, and their common interface inspires us to create APIs that properly support and leverage existing and future sequence types.

Most of the discussion in this chapter applies to sequences in general, from the familiar `list` to the `str` and `bytes` types added in Python 3. Specific topics on lists, tuples, arrays, and queues are also covered here, but the specifics of Unicode strings and byte sequences appear in [Chapter 4](ch04.html#strings_bytes_files). Also, the idea here is to cover sequence types that are ready to use. Creating your own sequence types is the subject of [Chapter 12](ch12.html#user_defined_sequences).

These are the main topics this chapter will cover:

- List comprehensions and the basics of generator expressions
    
- Using tuples as records versus using tuples as immutable lists
    
- Sequence unpacking and sequence patterns
    
- Reading from slices and writing to slices
    
- Specialized sequence types, like arrays and queues