# Further Reading

Chapter 1, “Data Structures,” of the [_Python Cookbook_, 3rd ed.](https://fpy.li/pycook3) (O’Reilly) by David Beazley and Brian K. Jones, has many recipes focusing on sequences, including “Recipe 1.11. Naming a Slice,” from which I learned the trick of assigning slices to variables to improve readability, illustrated in our [Example 2-13](#flat_file_invoce).

The second edition of the _Python Cookbook_ was written for Python 2.4, but much of its code works with Python 3, and a lot of the recipes in Chapters 5 and 6 deal with sequences. The book was edited by Alex Martelli, Anna Ravenscroft, and David Ascher, and it includes contributions by dozens of Pythonistas. The third edition was rewritten from scratch, and focuses more on the semantics of the language—particularly what has changed in Python 3—while the older volume emphasizes pragmatics (i.e., how to apply the language to real-world problems). Even though some of the second edition solutions are no longer the best approach, I honestly think it is worthwhile to have both editions of the _Python Cookbook_ on hand.

The official Python [“Sorting HOW TO”](https://fpy.li/2-22) has several examples of advanced tricks for using `sorted` and `list.sort`.

[PEP 3132—Extended Iterable Unpacking](https://fpy.li/2-2) is the canonical source to read about the new use of `*extra` syntax on the lefthand side of parallel assignments. If you’d like a glimpse of Python evolving, [“Missing *-unpacking generalizations”](https://fpy.li/2-24) is a bug tracker issue proposing enhancements to the iterable unpacking notation. [PEP 448—Additional Unpacking Generalizations](https://fpy.li/pep448) resulted from the discussions in that issue.

As I mentioned in [“Pattern Matching with Sequences”](#sequence_patterns_sec), Carol Willing’s [“Structural Pattern Matching”](https://fpy.li/2-6) section of [“What’s New In Python 3.10”](https://fpy.li/2-7) is a great introduction to this major new feature in about 1,400 words (that’s less than 5 pages when Firefox makes a PDF from the HTML). [PEP 636—Structural Pattern Matching: Tutorial](https://fpy.li/pep636) is also good, but longer. The same PEP 636 includes [“Appendix A—Quick Intro”](https://fpy.li/2-27). It is shorter than Willing’s intro because it omits high-level considerations about why pattern matching is good for you. If you need more arguments to convince yourself or others that pattern matching is good for Python, read the 22-page [PEP 635—Structural Pattern Matching: Motivation and Rationale](https://fpy.li/pep635).

Eli Bendersky’s blog post [“Less copies in Python with the buffer protocol and memoryviews”](https://fpy.li/2-28) includes a short tutorial on `memoryview`.

There are numerous books covering NumPy in the market, and many don’t mention “NumPy” in the title. Two examples are the open access [_Python Data Science Handbook_](https://fpy.li/2-29) by Jake VanderPlas, and the second edition of Wes McKinney’s [_Python for Data Analysis_](https://fpy.li/2-30).

“NumPy is all about vectorization.” That is the opening sentence of Nicolas P. Rougier’s open access book [_From Python to NumPy_](https://fpy.li/2-31). Vectorized operations apply mathematical functions to all elements of an array without an explicit loop written in Python. They can operate in parallel, using special vector instructions in modern CPUs, leveraging multiple cores or delegating to the GPU, depending on the library. The first example in Rougier’s book shows a speedup of 500 times after refactoring a nice Pythonic class using a generator method, into a lean and mean function calling a couple of NumPy vector functions.

To learn how to use `deque` (and other collections), see the examples and practical recipes in [“Container datatypes”](https://fpy.li/collec) in the Python documentation.

The best defense of the Python convention of excluding the last item in ranges and slices was written by Edsger W. Dijkstra himself, in a short memo titled [“Why Numbering Should Start at Zero”](https://fpy.li/2-32). The subject of the memo is mathematical notation, but it’s relevant to Python because Dijkstra explains with rigor and humor why a sequence like 2, 3, …, 12 should always be expressed as 2 ≤ i < 13. All other reasonable conventions are refuted, as is the idea of letting each user choose a convention. The title refers to zero-based indexing, but the memo is really about why it is desirable that `'ABCDE'[1:3]` means `'BC'` and not `'BCD'` and why it makes perfect sense to write `range(2, 13)` to produce 2, 3, 4, …, 12. By the way, the memo is a handwritten note, but it’s beautiful and totally readable. Dijkstra’s handwriting is so clear that someone created a [font](https://fpy.li/2-33) out of his notes.

##### Soapbox

The Nature of Tuples

In 2012, I presented a poster about the ABC language at PyCon US. Before creating Python, Guido van Rossum had worked on the ABC interpreter, so he came to see my poster. Among other things, we talked about the ABC _compounds_, which are clearly the predecessors of Python tuples. Compounds also support parallel assignment and are used as composite keys in dictionaries (or _tables_, in ABC parlance). However, compounds are not sequences. They are not iterable and you cannot retrieve a field by index, much less slice them. You either handle the compound as whole or extract the individual fields using parallel assignment, that’s all.

I told Guido that these limitations make the main purpose of compounds very clear: they are just records without field names. His response: “Making tuples behave as sequences was a hack.”

This illustrates the pragmatic approach that made Python more practical and more successful than ABC. From a language implementer perspective, making tuples behave as sequences costs little. As a result, the main use case for tuples as records is not so obvious, but we gained immutable lists—even if their type is not as clearly named as `frozenlist`.

Flat Versus Container Sequences

To highlight the different memory models of the sequence types, I used the terms _container sequence_ and _flat sequence_. The “container” word is from [the “Data Model” documentation](https://fpy.li/2-34):

> Some objects contain references to other objects; these are called containers.

I used the term “container sequence” to be specific, because there are containers in Python that are not sequences, like `dict` and `set`. Container sequences can be nested because they may contain objects of any type, including their own type.

On the other hand, _flat sequences_ are sequence types that cannot be nested because they only hold simple atomic types like integers, floats, or characters.

I adopted the term _flat sequence_ because I needed something to contrast with “container sequence.”

Despite the previous use of the word “containers” in the official documentation, there is an abstract class in `collections.abc` called `Container`. That ABC has just one method, `__contains__`—the special method behind the `in` operator. This means that strings and arrays, which are not containers in the traditional sense, are virtual subclasses of `Container` because they implement `__contains__`. This is just one more example of humans using a word to mean different things. In this book I’ll write “container” with lowercase letters to mean “an object that contains references to other objects,” and `Container` with a capitalized initial in a single-spaced font to refer to `collections.abc.Container`.

Mixed-Bag Lists

Introductory Python texts emphasize that lists can contain objects of mixed types, but in practice that feature is not very useful: we put items in a list to process them later, which implies that all items should support at least some operation in common (i.e., they should all “quack” whether or not they are genetically 100% ducks). For example, you can’t sort a list in Python 3 unless the items in it are comparable:

```
>>> 
```

Unlike lists, tuples often hold items of different types. That’s natural: if each item in a tuple is a field, then each field may have a different type.

key Is Brilliant

The optional `key` argument of `list.sort`, `sorted`, `max`, and `min` is a great idea. Other languages force you to provide a two-argument comparison function like the deprecated `cmp(a, b)` function in Python 2. Using `key` is both simpler and more efficient. It’s simpler because you just define a one-argument function that retrieves or calculates whatever criterion you want to use to sort your objects; this is easier than writing a two-argument function to return –1, 0, 1. It is also more efficient because the key function is invoked only once per item, while the two-argument comparison is called every time the sorting algorithm needs to compare two items. Of course, Python also has to compare the keys while sorting, but that comparison is done in optimized C code and not in a Python function that you wrote.

By the way, using `key` we can sort a mixed bag of numbers and number-like strings. We just need to decide whether we want to treat all items as integers or strings:

```
>>> 
```

Oracle, Google, and the Timbot Conspiracy

The sorting algorithm used in `sorted` and `list.sort` is Timsort, an adaptive algorithm that switches from insertion sort to merge sort strategies, depending on how ordered the data is. This is efficient because real-world data tends to have runs of sorted items. There is a [Wikipedia article](https://fpy.li/2-35) about it.

Timsort was first used in CPython in 2002. Since 2009, Timsort is also used to sort arrays in both standard Java and Android, a fact that became widely known when Oracle used some of the code related to Timsort as evidence of Google infringement of Sun’s intellectual property. For example, see this [order by Judge William Alsup](https://fpy.li/2-36) from 2012. In 2021, the US Supreme Court ruled Google’s use of Java code as “fair use.”

Timsort was invented by Tim Peters, a Python core developer so prolific that he is believed to be an AI, the Timbot. You can read about that conspiracy theory in [“Python Humor”](https://fpy.li/2-37). Tim also wrote “The Zen of Python”: `import this`.

[^1]: .

[^2]:  Thanks to reader Tina Lapine for pointing this out.

[^3]:  Thanks to tech reviewer Leonardo Rochael for this example.

[^4]:  problems that some language designers irrationally copied from C—decades after they were widely known as the cause of countless bugs.

[^5]:  The latter is named `eval` in Norvig’s code; I renamed it to avoid confusion with Python’s `eval` built-in.

[^6]:  we show that specially constructed memory views can have more than one dimension.

[^7]:  No, I did not get this backwards: the `ellipsis` class name is really all lowercase, and the instance is a built-in named `Ellipsis`, just like `bool` is lowercase but its instances are `True` and `False`.

[^8]:  `str` is an exception to this description. Because string building with `+=` in loops is so common in real codebases, CPython is optimized for this use case. Instances of `str` are allocated in memory with extra room, so that concatenation does not require copying the whole string every time.

[^9]:  Thanks to Leonardo Rochael and Cesar Kawakami for sharing this riddle at the 2013 PythonBrasil Conference.

[^10]: `, without errors. I am aware of that, but my intent is to show the strange behavior of the `+=` operator in this case.

[^11]:  Receiver is the target of a method call, the object bound to `self` in the method body.

[^12]: .

[^13]:  The words in this example are sorted alphabetically because they are 100% made of lowercase ASCII characters. See the warning after the example.

[^14]:  First in, first out—the default behavior of queues.