# list.sort Versus the sorted Built-In

The `list.sort` method sorts a list in place—that is, without making a copy. It returns `None` to remind us that it changes the receiver[^11]` function, which shuffles the mutable sequence `s` in place, and returns `None`.

###### Note

The convention of returning `None` to signal in-place changes has a drawback: we cannot cascade calls to those methods. In contrast, methods that return new objects (e.g., all `str` methods) can be cascaded in the fluent interface style. See Wikipedia’s [“Fluent interface” entry](https://fpy.li/2-15) for further description of this topic.

In contrast, the built-in function `sorted` creates a new list and returns it. It accepts any iterable object as an argument, including immutable sequences and generators (see [Chapter 17](ch17.html#iterables2generators)). Regardless of the type of iterable given to `sorted`, it always returns a newly created list.

Both `list.sort` and `sorted` take two optional, keyword-only arguments:

`reverse`

If `True`, the items are returned in descending order (i.e., by reversing the comparison of the items). The default is `False`.

`key`

A one-argument function that will be applied to each item to produce its sorting key. For example, when sorting a list of strings, `key=str.lower` can be used to perform a case-insensitive sort, and `key=len` will sort the strings by character length. The default is the identity function (i.e., the items themselves are compared).

###### Tip

You can also use the optional keyword parameter `key` with the `min()` and `max()` built-ins and with other functions from the standard library (e.g., `itertools.groupby()` and `heapq.nlargest()`).

Here are a few examples to clarify the use of these functions and keyword arguments. The examples also demonstrate that Python’s sorting algorithm is stable (i.e., it preserves the relative ordering of items that compare equally):[^12]

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

This produces a new list of strings sorted alphabetically.[^13]

[![^2]

Inspecting the original list, we see it is unchanged.

[![^3]

This is the previous “alphabetical” ordering, reversed.

[![^4]

A new list of strings, now sorted by length. Because the sorting algorithm is stable, “grape” and “apple,” both of length 5, are in the original order.

[![^5]

These are the strings sorted by length in descending order. It is not the reverse of the previous result because the sorting is stable, so again “grape” appears before “apple.”

[![^6]

So far, the ordering of the original `fruits` list has not changed.

[![^7]

This sorts the list in place, and returns `None` (which the console omits).

[![^8]

Now `fruits` is sorted.

###### Warning

By default, Python sorts strings lexicographically by character code. That means ASCII uppercase letters will come before lowercase letters, and non-ASCII characters are unlikely to be sorted in a sensible way. [“Sorting Unicode Text”](ch04.html#sorting_unicode_sec) covers proper ways of sorting text as humans would expect.

Once your sequences are sorted, they can be very efficiently searched. A binary search algorithm is already provided in the `bisect` module of the Python standard library. That module also includes the `bisect.insort` function, which you can use to make sure that your sorted sequences stay sorted. You’ll find an illustrated introduction to the `bisect` module in the [“Managing Ordered Sequences with Bisect”](https://fpy.li/bisect) post in the [_fluentpython.com_](http://fluentpython.com) companion website.

Much of what we have seen so far in this chapter applies to sequences in general, not just lists or tuples. Python programmers sometimes overuse the `list` type because it is so handy—I know I’ve done it. For example, if you are processing large lists of numbers, you should consider using arrays instead. The remainder of the chapter is devoted to alternatives to lists and tuples.