### Experiment: Break the spinner for an insight

Here is an experiment I recommend to understand how _spinner_async.py_ works. Import the `time` module, then go to the `slow` coroutine and replace the line `await asyncio.sleep(3)` with a call to `time.sleep(3)`, like in [Example 19-6](#spinner_async_time_sleep_ex).

##### Example 19-6. spinner_async.py: replacing `await asyncio.sleep(3)` with `time.sleep(3)`

```
async
```

Watching the behavior is more memorable than reading about it. Go ahead, I’ll wait.

When you run the experiment, this is what you see:

1. The spinner object is shown, similar to this: `<Task pending name='Task-2' coro=<spin() running at /path/to/spinner_async.py:12>>`.
    
2. The spinner never appears. The program hangs for 3 seconds.
    
3. `Answer: 42` is displayed and the program ends.
    

To understand what is happening, recall that Python code using `asyncio` has only one flow of execution, unless you’ve explicitly started additional threads or processes. That means only one coroutine executes at any point in time. Concurrency is achieved by control passing from one coroutine to another. In [Example 19-7](#spinner_async_experiment_ex), let’s focus on what happens in the `supervisor` and `slow` coroutines during the proposed experiment.

##### Example 19-7. spinner_async_experiment.py: the `supervisor` and `slow` coroutines

```
async
```

[![^1]

The `spinner` task is created, to eventually drive the execution of `spin`.

[![^2]

The display shows the `Task` is “pending.”

[![^3]

The `await` expression transfers control to the `slow` coroutine.

[![^4]

`time.sleep(3)` blocks for 3 seconds; nothing else can happen in the program, because the main thread is blocked—and it is the only thread. The operating system will continue with other activities. After 3 seconds, `sleep` unblocks, and `slow` returns.

[![^5]

Right after `slow` returns, the `spinner` task is cancelled. The flow of control never reached the body of the `spin` coroutine.

The _spinner_async_experiment.py_ teaches an important lesson, as explained in the following warning.

###### Warning

Never use `time.sleep(…)` in `asyncio` coroutines unless you want to pause your whole program. If a coroutine needs to spend some time doing nothing, it should `await asyncio.sleep(DELAY)`. This yields control back to the `asyncio` event loop, which can drive other pending coroutines.

##### Greenlet and gevent

As we discuss concurrency with coroutines, it’s important to mention the [_greenlet_](https://fpy.li/19-14) package, which has been around for many years and is used at scale.[^11] compatible with _asyncio_.

The [_gevent_](https://fpy.li/19-17) networking library monkey patches Python’s standard `socket` module making it nonblocking by replacing some of its code with greenlets. To a large extent, _gevent_ is transparent to the surrounding code, making it easier to adapt sequential applications and libraries—such as database drivers—to perform concurrent network I/O. [Numerous open source projects](https://fpy.li/19-18) use _gevent_, including the widely deployed [_Gunicorn_](https://fpy.li/gunicorn)—mentioned in [“WSGI Application Servers”](#wsgi_app_server_sec).