## Overriding Descriptors

A descriptor that implements the `__set__` method is an _overriding descriptor_, because although it is a class attribute, a descriptor implementing `__set__` will override attempts to assign to instance attributes. This is how [Example 23-3](#lineitem_class_v4) was implemented. Properties are also overriding descriptors: if you don’t provide a setter function, the default `__set__` from the `property` class will raise `AttributeError` to signal that the attribute is read-only. Given the code in [Example 23-8](#descriptorkinds_ex), experiments with an overriding descriptor can be seen in [Example 23-9](#descriptorkinds_demo1).

###### Warning

Python contributors and authors use different terms when discussing these concepts. I adopted “overriding descriptor” from the book _Python in a Nutshell_. The official Python documentation uses “data descriptor,” but “overriding descriptor” highlights the special behavior. Overriding descriptors are also called “enforced descriptors.” Synonyms for nonoverriding descriptors include “nondata descriptors” or “shadowable descriptors.”

##### Example 23-9. Behavior of an overriding descriptor

```
>>
```

[![^1]

Create `Managed` object for testing.

[![^2]

`obj.over` triggers the descriptor `__get__` method, passing the managed instance `obj` as the second argument.

[![^3]

`Managed.over` triggers the descriptor `__get__` method, passing `None` as the second argument (`instance`).

[![^4]

Assigning to `obj.over` triggers the descriptor `__set__` method, passing the value `7` as the last argument.

[![^5]

Reading `obj.over` still invokes the descriptor `__get__` method.

[![^6]

Bypassing the descriptor, setting a value directly to the `obj.__dict__`.

[![^7]

Verify that the value is in the `obj.__dict__`, under the `over` key.

[![^8]

However, even with an instance attribute named `over`, the `Managed.over` descriptor still overrides attempts to read `obj.over`.