## Overriding Descriptor Without __get__

Properties and other overriding descriptors, such as Django model fields, implement both `__set__` and `__get__`, but it’s also possible to implement only `__set__`, as we saw in [Example 23-2](#lineitem_class_v3). In this case, only writing is handled by the descriptor. Reading the descriptor through an instance will return the descriptor object itself because there is no `__get__` to handle that access. If a namesake instance attribute is created with a new value via direct access to the instance `__dict__`, the `__set__` method will still override further attempts to set that attribute, but reading that attribute will simply return the new value from the instance, instead of returning the descriptor object. In other words, the instance attribute will shadow the descriptor, but only when reading. See [Example 23-10](#descriptorkinds_demo2).

##### Example 23-10. Overriding descriptor without `__get__`

```
>>
```

[![^1]

This overriding descriptor doesn’t have a `__get__` method, so reading `obj.over_no_get` retrieves the descriptor instance from the class.

[![^2]

The same thing happens if we retrieve the descriptor instance directly from the managed class.

[![^3]

Trying to set a value to `obj.over_no_get` invokes the `__set__` descriptor method.

[![^4]

Because our `__set__` doesn’t make changes, reading `obj.over_no_get` again retrieves the descriptor instance from the managed class.

[![^5]

Going through the instance `__dict__` to set an instance attribute named `over_no_get`.

[![^6]

Now that `over_no_get` instance attribute shadows the descriptor, but only for reading.

[![^7]

Trying to assign a value to `obj.over_no_get` still goes through the descriptor set.

[![^8]

But for reading, that descriptor is shadowed as long as there is a namesake instance attribute.