## Nonoverriding Descriptor

A descriptor that does not implement `__set__` is a nonoverriding descriptor. Setting an instance attribute with the same name will shadow the descriptor, rendering it ineffective for handling that attribute in that specific instance. Methods and `@functools.cached_property` are implemented as nonoverriding descriptors. [Example 23-11](#descriptorkinds_demo3) shows the operation of a nonoverriding descriptor.

##### Example 23-11. Behavior of a nonoverriding descriptor

```
>>
```

[![^1]

`obj.non_over` triggers the descriptor `__get__` method, passing `obj` as the second argument.

[![^2]

`Managed.non_over` is a nonoverriding descriptor, so there is no `__set__` to interfere with this assignment.

[![^3]

The `obj` now has an instance attribute named `non_over`, which shadows the namesake descriptor attribute in the `Managed` class.

[![^4]

The `Managed.non_over` descriptor is still there, and catches this access via the class.

[![^5]

If the `non_over` instance attribute is deleted…

[![^6]

…then reading `obj.non_over` hits the `__get__` method of the descriptor in the class, but note that the second argument is the managed instance.

In the previous examples, we saw several assignments to an instance attribute with the same name as a descriptor, and different results according to the presence of a `__set__` method in the descriptor.

The setting of attributes in the class cannot be controlled by descriptors attached to the same class. In particular, this means that the descriptor attributes themselves can be clobbered by assigning to the class, as the next section explains.