# Chapter 13. Interfaces, Protocols, and ABCs

> Program to an interface, not an implementation.
> 
> Gamma, Helm, Johnson, Vlissides, First Principle of Object-Oriented Design[^1]

Object-oriented programming is all about interfaces. The best approach to understanding a type in Python is knowing the methods it provides—its interface—as discussed in [“Types Are Defined by Supported Operations”](ch08.html#types_defined_by_ops_sec) ([Chapter 8](ch08.html#type_hints_in_def_ch)).

Depending on the programming language, we have one or more ways of defining and using interfaces. Since Python 3.8, we have four ways. They are depicted in the _Typing Map_ ([Figure 13-1](#type_systems_described)). We can summarize them like this:

Duck typing

Python’s default approach to typing from the beginning. We’ve been studying duck typing since [Chapter 1](ch01.html#data_model).

Goose typing

The approach supported by abstract base classes (ABCs) since Python 2.6, which relies on runtime checks of objects against ABCs. _Goose typing_ is a major subject in this chapter.

Static typing

The traditional approach of statically-typed languages like C and Java; supported since Python 3.5 by the `typing` module, and enforced by external type checkers compliant with [PEP 484—Type Hints](https://fpy.li/pep484). This is not the theme of this chapter. Most of [Chapter 8](ch08.html#type_hints_in_def_ch) and the upcoming [Chapter 15](ch15.html#more_types_ch) are about static typing.

Static duck typing

An approach made popular by the Go language; supported by subclasses of `typing.Protocol`—new in Python 3.8—also enforced by external type checkers. We first saw this in [“Static Protocols”](ch08.html#protocols_in_fn) ([Chapter 8](ch08.html#type_hints_in_def_ch)).