# Two Kinds of Protocols

The word _protocol_ has different meanings in computer science depending on context. A network protocol such as HTTP specifies commands that a client can send to a server, such as `GET`, `PUT`, and `HEAD`. We saw in [“Protocols and Duck Typing”](ch12.html#protocol_duck_section) that an object protocol specifies methods which an object must provide to fulfill a role. The `FrenchDeck` example in [Chapter 1](ch01.html#data_model) demonstrated one object protocol, the sequence protocol: the methods that allow a Python object to behave as a sequence.

Implementing a full protocol may require several methods, but often it is OK to implement only part of it. Consider the `Vowels` class in [Example 13-1](#ex_minimal_sequence).

##### Example 13-1. Partial sequence protocol implementation with `__getitem__`

```
>>> 
```

Implementing `__getitem__` is enough to allow retrieving items by index, and also to support iteration and the `in` operator. The `__getitem__` special method is really the key to the sequence protocol. Take a look at this entry from the [_Python/C API Reference Manual_](https://fpy.li/13-1), [“Sequence Protocol” section](https://fpy.li/13-2):

`int PySequence_Check(PyObject *o)`

Return `1` if the object provides sequence protocol, and `0` otherwise. Note that it returns `1` for Python classes with a `__getitem__()` method unless they are `dict` subclasses […].

We expect a sequence to also support `len()`, by implementing `__len__`. `Vowels` has no `__len__` method, but it still behaves as a sequence in some contexts. And that may be enough for our purposes. That is why I like to say that a protocol is an “informal interface.” That is also how protocols are understood in Smalltalk, the first object-oriented programming environment to use that term.

Except in pages about network programming, most uses of the word “protocol” in the Python documentation refer to these informal interfaces.

Now, with the adoption of [PEP 544—Protocols: Structural subtyping (static duck typing)](https://fpy.li/pep544) in Python 3.8, the word “protocol” has another meaning in Python—closely related, but different. As we saw in [“Static Protocols”](ch08.html#protocols_in_fn) ([Chapter 8](ch08.html#type_hints_in_def_ch)), PEP 544 allows us to create subclasses of `typing.Protocol` to define one or more methods that a class must implement (or inherit) to satisfy a static type checker.

When I need to be specific, I will adopt these terms:

Dynamic protocol

The informal protocols Python always had. Dynamic protocols are implicit, defined by convention, and described in the documentation. Python’s most important dynamic protocols are supported by the interpreter itself, and are documented in the [“Data Model” chapter](https://fpy.li/dtmodel) of _The Python Language Reference_.

Static protocol

A protocol as defined by [PEP 544—Protocols: Structural subtyping (static duck typing)](https://fpy.li/pep544), since Python 3.8. A static protocol has an explicit definition: a `typing.Protocol` subclass.

There are two key differences between them:

- An object may implement only part of a dynamic protocol and still be useful; but to fulfill a static protocol, the object must provide every method declared in the protocol class, even if your program doesn’t need them all.
    
- Static protocols can be verified by static type checkers, but dynamic protocols can’t.
    

Both kinds of protocols share the essential characteristic that a class never needs to declare that it supports a protocol by name, i.e., by inheritance.

In addition to static protocols, Python provides another way of defining an explicit interface in code: an abstract base class (ABC).

The rest of this chapter covers dynamic and static protocols, as well as ABCs.