# Pattern Matching with Sequences

The most visible new feature in Python 3.10 is pattern matching with the `match/case` statement proposed in [PEP 634—Structural Pattern Matching: Specification](https://fpy.li/pep634).

###### Note

Python core developer Carol Willing wrote the excellent introduction to pattern matching in the [“Structural Pattern Matching”](https://fpy.li/2-6) section of [“What’s New In Python 3.10”](https://fpy.li/2-7). You may want to read that quick overview. In this book, I chose to split the coverage of pattern matching over different chapters, depending on the pattern types: [“Pattern Matching with Mappings”](ch03.html#pattern_matching_mappings_sec) and [“Pattern Matching Class Instances”](ch05.html#pattern_instances_sec). An extended example is in [“Pattern Matching in lis.py: A Case Study”](ch18.html#pattern_matching_case_study_sec).

Here is a first example of `match/case` handling sequences. Imagine you are designing a robot that accepts commands sent as sequences of words and numbers, like `BEEPER 440 3`. After splitting into parts and parsing the numbers, you’d have a message like `['BEEPER', 440, 3]`. You could use a method like this to handle such messages:

##### Example 2-9. Method from an imaginary `Robot` class

```
    
```

[![^1]

The expression after the `match` keyword is the _subject_. The subject is the data that Python will try to match to the patterns in each `case` clause.

[![^2]

This pattern matches any subject that is a sequence with three items. The first item must be the string `'BEEPER'`. The second and third item can be anything, and they will be bound to the variables `frequency` and `times`, in that order.

[![^3]

This matches any subject with two items, the first being `'NECK'`.

[![^4]

This will match a subject with three items starting with `'LED'`. If the number of items does not match, Python proceeds to the next `case`.

[![^5]

Another sequence pattern starting with `'LED'`, now with five items—including the `'LED'` constant.

[![^6]

This is the default `case`. It will match any subject that did not match a previous pattern. The `_` variable is special, as we’ll soon see.

On the surface, `match/case` may look like the `switch/case` statement from the C language—but that’s only half the story.[^4] One key improvement of `match` over `switch` is _destructuring_—a more advanced form of unpacking. Destructuring is a new word in the Python vocabulary, but it is commonly used in the documentation of languages that support pattern matching—like Scala and Elixir.

As a first example of destructuring, [Example 2-10](#ex_nested_tuple_match) shows part of [Example 2-8](#ex_nested_tuple) rewritten with `match/case`.

##### Example 2-10. Destructuring nested tuples—requires Python ≥ 3.10

```
metro_areas
```

[![^1]

The subject of this `match` is `record`— i.e., each of the tuples in `metro_areas`.

[![^2]

A `case` clause has two parts: a pattern and an optional guard with the `if` keyword.

In general, a sequence pattern matches the subject if:

1. The subject is a sequence _and_;
    
2. The subject and the pattern have the same number of items _and_;
    
3. Each corresponding item matches, including nested items.
    

For example, the pattern `[name, _, _, (lat, lon)]` in [Example 2-10](#ex_nested_tuple_match) matches a sequence with four items, and the last item must be a two-item sequence.

Sequence patterns may be written as tuples or lists or any combination of nested tuples and lists, but it makes no difference which syntax you use: in a sequence pattern, square brackets and parentheses mean the same thing. I wrote the pattern as a list with a nested 2-tuple just to avoid repeating brackets or parentheses in [Example 2-10](#ex_nested_tuple_match).

A sequence pattern can match instances of most actual or virtual subclasses of `collections.abc.Sequence`, with the exception of `str`, `bytes`, and `bytearray`.

###### Warning

Instances of `str`, `bytes`, and `bytearray` are not handled as sequences in the context of `match/case`. A `match` subject of one of those types is treated as an “atomic” value—like the integer 987 is treated as one value, not a sequence of digits. Treating those three types as sequences could cause bugs due to unintended matches. If you want to treat an object of those types as a sequence subject, convert it in the `match` clause. For example, see `tuple(phone)` in the following:

    `match` `tuple``(``phone``):`
        `case` `[``'1'``,` `*``rest``]:`  `# North America and Caribbean`
            `...`
        `case` `[``'2'``,` `*``rest``]:`  `# Africa and some territories`
            `...`
        `case` `[``'3'` `|` `'4'``,` `*``rest``]:`  `# Europe`
            `...`

In the standard library, these types are compatible with sequence patterns:

list     memoryview    array.array
tuple    range         collections.deque

Unlike unpacking, patterns don’t destructure iterables that are not sequences (such as iterators).

The `_` symbol is special in patterns: it matches any single item in that position, but it is never bound to the value of the matched item. Also, the `_` is the only variable that can appear more than once in a pattern.

You can bind any part of a pattern with a variable using the `as` keyword:

        `case` `[``name``,` `_``,` `_``,` `(``lat``,` `lon``)` `as` `coord``]:`

Given the subject `['Shanghai', 'CN', 24.9, (31.1, 121.3)]`, the preceding pattern will match, and set the following variables:

|Variable|Set Value|
|---|---|
|`name`|`'Shanghai'`|
|`lat`|`31.1`|
|`lon`|`121.3`|
|`coord`|`(31.1, 121.3)`|

We can make patterns more specific by adding type information. For example, the following pattern matches the same nested sequence structure as the previous example, but the first item must be an instance of `str`, and both items in the 2-tuple must be instances of `float`:

        `case` `[``str``(``name``),` `_``,` `_``,` `(``float``(``lat``),` `float``(``lon``))]:`

###### Tip

The expressions `str(name)` and `float(lat)` look like constructor calls, which we’d use to convert `name` and `lat` to `str` and `float`. But in the context of a pattern, that syntax performs a runtime type check: the preceding pattern will match a four-item sequence in which item 0 must be a `str`, and item 3 must be a pair of floats. Additionally, the `str` in item 0 will be bound to the `name` variable, and the floats in item 3 will be bound to `lat` and `lon`, respectively. So, although `str(name)` borrows the syntax of a constructor call, the semantics are completely different in the context of a pattern. Using arbitrary classes in patterns is covered in [“Pattern Matching Class Instances”](ch05.html#pattern_instances_sec).

On the other hand, if we want to match any subject sequence starting with a `str`, and ending with a nested sequence of two floats, we can write:

        `case` `[``str``(``name``),` `*``_``,` `(``float``(``lat``),` `float``(``lon``))]:`

The `*_` matches any number of items, without binding them to a variable. Using `*extra` instead of `*_` would bind the items to `extra` as a `list` with 0 or more items.

The optional guard clause starting with `if` is evaluated only if the pattern matches, and can reference variables bound in the pattern, as in [Example 2-10](#ex_nested_tuple_match):

        `match` `record``:`
            `case` `[``name``,` `_``,` `_``,` `(``lat``,` `lon``)]` `if` `lon` `<=` `0``:`
                `print``(``f``'``{name:15}` `|` `{lat:9.4f}` `|` `{lon:9.4f}``'``)`

The nested block with the `print` statement runs only if the pattern matches and the guard expression is _truthy_.

###### Tip

Destructuring with patterns is so expressive that sometimes a `match` with a single `case` can make code simpler. Guido van Rossum has a collection of `case/match` examples, including one that he titled [“A very deep iterable and type match with extraction”](https://fpy.li/2-10).

[Example 2-10](#ex_nested_tuple_match) is not an improvement over [Example 2-8](#ex_nested_tuple). It’s just an example to contrast two ways of doing the same thing. The next example shows how pattern matching contributes to clear, concise, and effective code.