## Slice Objects

This is no secret, but worth repeating just in case: `s[a:b:c]` can be used to specify a stride or step `c`, causing the resulting slice to skip items. The stride can also be negative, returning items in reverse. Three examples make this clear:

```
>>> 
```

Another example was shown in [Chapter 1](ch01.html#data_model) when we used `deck[12::13]` to get all the aces in the unshuffled deck:

```
>>> 
```

The notation `a:b:c` is only valid within `[]` when used as the indexing or subscript operator, and it produces a slice object: `slice(a, b, c)`. As we will see in [“How Slicing Works”](ch12.html#how_slicing_works), to evaluate the expression `seq[start:stop:step]`, Python calls `seq.__getitem__(slice(start, stop, step))`. Even if you are not implementing your own sequence types, knowing about slice objects is useful because it lets you assign names to slices, just like spreadsheets allow naming of cell ranges.

Suppose you need to parse flat-file data like the invoice shown in [Example 2-13](#flat_file_invoce). Instead of filling your code with hardcoded slices, you can name them. See how readable this makes the `for` loop at the end of the example.

##### Example 2-13. Line items from a flat-file invoice

```
>>> 
```

We’ll come back to `slice` objects when we discuss creating your own collections in [“Vector Take #2: A Sliceable Sequence”](ch12.html#sliceable_sequence). Meanwhile, from a user perspective, slicing includes additional features such as multidimensional slices and ellipsis (`...`) notation. Read on.