# About Gradual Typing

PEP 484 introduced a _gradual type system_ to Python. Other languages with gradual type systems are Microsoft’s TypeScript, Dart (the language of the Flutter SDK, created by Google), and Hack (a dialect of PHP supported by Facebook’s HHVM virtual machine). The Mypy type checker itself started as a language: a gradually typed dialect of Python with its own interpreter. Guido van Rossum convinced the creator of Mypy, Jukka Lehtosalo, to make it a tool for checking annotated Python code.

A gradual type system:

Is optional

By default, the type checker should not emit warnings for code that has no type hints. Instead, the type checker assumes the `Any` type when it cannot determine the type of an object. The `Any` type is considered compatible with all other types.

Does not catch type errors at runtime

Type hints are used by static type checkers, linters, and IDEs to raise warnings. They do not prevent inconsistent values from being passed to functions or assigned to variables at runtime.

Does not enhance performance

Type annotations provide data that could, in theory, allow optimizations in the generated bytecode, but such optimizations are not implemented in any Python runtime that I am aware in of July 2021.[^2]

The best usability feature of gradual typing is that annotations are always optional.

With static type systems, most type constraints are easy to express, many are cumbersome, some are hard, and a few are impossible.[^3] You may very well write an excellent piece of Python code, with good test coverage and passing tests, but still be unable to add type hints that satisfy a type checker. That’s OK; just leave out the problematic type hints and ship it!

Type hints are optional at all levels: you can have entire packages with no type hints, you can silence the type checker when you import one of those packages into a module where you use type hints, and you can add special comments to make the type checker ignore specific lines in your code.

###### Tip

Seeking 100% coverage of type hints is likely to stimulate type hinting without proper thought, only to satisfy the metric. It will also prevent teams from making the most of the power and flexibility of Python. Code without type hints should naturally be accepted when annotations would make an API less user-friendly, or unduly complicate its implementation.