# Imperfect Typing and Strong Testing

Maintainers of large corporate codebases report that many bugs are found by static type checkers and fixed more cheaply than if the bugs were discovered only after the code is running in production. However, it’s essential to note that automated testing was standard practice and widely adopted long before static typing was introduced in the companies that I know about.

Even in the contexts where they are most beneficial, static typing cannot be trusted as the ultimate arbiter of correctness. It’s not hard to find:

False positives

Tools report type errors on code that is correct.

False negatives

Tools don’t report type errors on code that is incorrect.

Also, if we are forced to type check everything, we lose some of the expressive power of Python:

- Some handy features can’t be statically checked; for example, argument unpacking like `config(**settings)`.
    
- Advanced features like properties, descriptors, metaclasses, and metaprogramming in general are poorly supported or beyond comprehension for type checkers.
    
- Type checkers lag behind Python releases, rejecting or even crashing while analyzing code with new language features—for more than a year in some cases.
    

Common data constraints cannot be expressed in the type system—even simple ones. For example, type hints are unable to ensure “quantity must be an integer > 0” or “label must be a string with 6 to 12 ASCII letters.” In general, type hints are not helpful to catch errors in business logic.

Given those caveats, type hints cannot be the mainstay of software quality, and making them mandatory without exception would amplify the downsides.

Consider a static type checker as one of the tools in a modern CI pipeline, along with test runners, linters, etc. The point of a CI pipeline is to reduce software failures, and automated tests catch many bugs that are beyond the reach of type hints. Any code you can write in Python, you can test in Python—with or without type hints.

###### Note

The title and conclusion of this section were inspired by Bruce Eckel’s article [“Strong Typing vs. Strong Testing”](https://fpy.li/8-37), also published in the anthology [_The Best Software Writing I_](https://fpy.li/8-38), edited by Joel Spolsky (Apress). Bruce is a fan of Python and author of books about C++, Java, Scala, and Kotlin. In that post, he tells how he was a static typing advocate until he learned Python and concluded: “If a Python program has adequate unit tests, it can be as robust as a C++, Java, or C# program with adequate unit tests (although the tests in Python will be faster to write).”

This wraps up our coverage of Python’s type hints for now. They are also the main focus of [Chapter 15](ch15.html#more_types_ch), which covers generic classes, variance, overloaded signatures, type casting, and more. Meanwhile, type hints will make guest appearances in several examples throughout the book.