# Chapter Summary

We started with a brief introduction to the concept of gradual typing and then switched to a hands-on approach. It’s hard to see how gradual typing works without a tool that actually reads the type hints, so we developed an annotated function guided by Mypy error reports.

Back to the idea of gradual typing, we explored how it is a hybrid of Python’s traditional duck typing and the nominal typing more familiar to users of Java, C++, and other statically typed languages.

Most of the chapter was devoted to presenting the major groups of types used in annotations. Many of the types we covered are related to familiar Python object types, such as collections, tuples, and callables—extended to support generic notation like `Sequence[float]`. Many of those types are temporary surrogates implemented in the `typing` module before the standard types were changed to support generics in Python 3.9.

Some of the types are special entities. `Any`, `Optional`, `Union`, and `NoReturn` have nothing to do with actual objects in memory, but exist only in the abstract domain of the type system.

We studied parameterized generics and type variables, which bring more flexibility to type hints without sacrificing type safety.

Parameterized generics become even more expressive with the use of `Protocol`. Because it appeared only in Python 3.8, `Protocol` is not widely used yet—but it is hugely important. `Protocol` enables static duck typing: the essential bridge between Python’s duck-typed core and the nominal typing that allows static type checkers to catch bugs.

While covering some of these types, we experimented with Mypy to see type checking errors and inferred types with the help of Mypy’s magic `reveal_type()` function.

The final section covered how to annotate positional-only and variadic parameters.

Type hints are a complex and evolving topic. Fortunately, they are an optional feature. Let us keep Python accessible to the widest user base and stop preaching that all Python code should have type hints—as I’ve seen in public sermons by typing evangelists.

Our BDFL[^19] emeritus led this push toward type hints in Python, so it’s only fair that this chapter starts and ends with his words:

> I wouldn’t like a version of Python where I was morally obligated to add type hints all the time. I really do think that type hints have their place but there are also plenty of times that it’s not worth it, and it’s so wonderful that you can choose to use them.[^20]
> 
> Guido van Rossum