# Further Reading

Bernát Gábor wrote in his excellent post, [“The state of type hints in Python”](https://fpy.li/8-41):

> Type hints should be used whenever unit tests are worth writing.

I am a big fan of testing, but I also do a lot of exploratory coding. When I am exploring, tests and type hints are not helpful. They are a drag.

Gábor’s post is one of the best introductions to Python’s type hints that I found, along with Geir Arne Hjelle’s [“Python Type Checking (Guide)”](https://fpy.li/8-42). [“Hypermodern Python Chapter 4: Typing”](https://fpy.li/8-43) by Claudio Jolowicz is a shorter introduction that also covers runtime type checking validation.

For deeper coverage, the [Mypy documentation](https://fpy.li/8-44) is the best source. It is valuable regardless of the type checker you are using, because it has tutorial and reference pages about Python typing in general—not just about the Mypy tool itself. There you will also find a handy [cheat sheets](https://fpy.li/8-45) and a very useful page about [common issues and solutions](https://fpy.li/8-46).

The [`typing`](https://fpy.li/typing) module documentation is a good quick reference, but it doesn’t go into much detail. [PEP 483—The Theory of Type Hints](https://fpy.li/pep483) includes a deep explanation about variance, using `Callable` to illustrate contravariance. The ultimate references are the PEP documents related to typing. There are more than 20 of them already. The intended audience of PEPs are Python core developers and Python’s Steering Council, so they assume a lot of prior knowledge and are certainly not light reading.

As mentioned, [Chapter 15](ch15.html#more_types_ch) covers more typing topics, and [“Further Reading”](ch15.html#more_type_hints_further_sec) provides additional references, including [Table 15-1](ch15.html#typing_peps_tbl), listing typing PEPs approved or under discussion as of late 2021.

[“Awesome Python Typing”](https://fpy.li/8-47) is a valuable collection of links to tools and references.

##### Soapbox

Just Ride

> Forget the ultralight, uncomfortable bikes, flashy jerseys, clunky shoes that clip onto tiny pedals, the grinding out of endless miles. Instead, ride like you did when you were a kid—just get on your bike and discover the pure joy of riding it.
> 
> Grant Petersen, _Just Ride: A Radically Practical Guide to Riding Your Bike_ (Workman Publishing)

If coding is not your whole profession, but a useful tool in your profession, or something you do to learn, tinker, and enjoy, you probably don’t need type hints any more than most bikers need shoes with stiff soles and metal cleats.

Just code.

The Cognitive Effect of Typing

I worry about the effect type hints will have on Python coding style.

I agree that users of most APIs benefit from type hints. But Python attracted me—among other reasons—because it provides functions that are so powerful that they replace entire APIs, and we can write similarly powerful functions ourselves. Consider the [`max()`](https://fpy.li/8-48) built-in. It’s powerful, yet easy to understand. But I will show in [“Max Overload”](ch15.html#max_overload_sec) that it takes 14 lines of type hints to properly annotate it—not counting a `typing.Protocol` and a few `TypeVar` definitions to support those type hints.

I am concerned that strict enforcement of type hints in libraries will discourage programmers from even considering writing such functions in the future.

According to the English Wikipedia, [“linguistic relativity”](https://fpy.li/8-49)—a.k.a. the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis— is a “principle claiming that the structure of a language affects its speakers’ world view or cognition.” Wikipedia further explains:

- The _strong_ version says that language _determines_ thought and that linguistic categories limit and determine cognitive categories.
    
- The _weak_ version says that linguistic categories and usage only _influence_ thought and decisions.
    

Linguists generally agree the strong version is false, but there is empirical evidence supporting the weak version.

I am not aware of specific studies with programming languages, but in my experience they’ve had a big impact on how I approach problems. The first programming language I used professionally was Applesoft BASIC in the age of 8-bit computers. Recursion was not directly supported by BASIC—you had to roll your own call stack to use it. So I never considered using recursive algorithms or data structures. I knew at some conceptual level such things existed, but they weren’t part of my problem-solving toolbox.

Decades later when I started with Elixir, I enjoyed solving problems with recursion and overused it—until I discovered that many of my solutions would be simpler if I used existing functions from the Elixir `Enum` and `Stream` modules. I learned that idiomatic Elixir application-level code rarely has explicit recursive calls, but uses enums and streams that implement recursion under the hood.

Linguistic relativity could explain the widespread idea (also unproven) that learning different programming languages makes you a better programmer, particularly when the languages support different programming paradigms. Practicing Elixir made me more likely to apply functional patterns when I write Python or Go code.

Now, back to Earth.

The `requests` package would probably have a very different API if Kenneth Reitz was determined (or told by his boss) to annotate all its functions. His goal was to write an API that was easy to use, flexible, and powerful. He succeeded, given the amazing popularity of `requests`—in May 2020, it’s #4 on [PyPI Stats](https://fpy.li/8-50), with 2.6 million downloads a day. #1 is `urllib3`, a dependency of `requests`.

In 2017, the `requests` maintainers [decided](https://fpy.li/8-51) not to spend their time writing type hints. One of the maintainers, Cory Benfield, had written an [e-mail](https://fpy.li/8-52) stating:

> I think that libraries with _Pythonic_ APIs are the least likely to take up this typing system because it will provide the least value to them.

In that message, Benfield gave this extreme example of a tentative type definition for the `files` keyword argument of [`requests.request()`](https://fpy.li/8-53):

Optional[
  Union[
    Mapping[
      basestring,
      Union[
        Tuple[basestring, Optional[Union[basestring, file]]],
        Tuple[basestring, Optional[Union[basestring, file]],
              Optional[basestring]],
        Tuple[basestring, Optional[Union[basestring, file]],
              Optional[basestring], Optional[Headers]]
      ]
    ],
    Iterable[
      Tuple[
        basestring,
        Union[
          Tuple[basestring, Optional[Union[basestring, file]]],
          Tuple[basestring, Optional[Union[basestring, file]],
                Optional[basestring]],
          Tuple[basestring, Optional[Union[basestring, file]],
                Optional[basestring], Optional[Headers]]
      ]
    ]
  ]
]

And that assumes this definition:

Headers = Union[
  Mapping[basestring, basestring],
  Iterable[Tuple[basestring, basestring]],
]

Do you think `requests` would be the way it is if the maintainers insisted on 100% type hint coverage? SQLAlchemy is another important package that doesn’t play well with type hints.

What makes these libraries great is embracing the dynamic nature of Python.

While there are benefits to type hints, there is also a price to pay.

First, there is the significant investment of understanding how the type system works. That’s a one-time cost.

But there is also a recurring cost, forever.

We lose some of the expressive power of Python if we insist on type checking everything. Beautiful features like argument unpacking—e.g., `config(**settings)`—are beyond comprehension for type checkers.

If you want to have a call like `config(**settings)` type checked, you must spell every argument out. That brings me memories of Turbo Pascal code I wrote 35 years ago.

Libraries that use metaprogramming are hard or impossible to annotate. Surely metaprogramming can be abused, but it’s also what makes many Python packages a joy to use.

If type hints are mandated top-down without exceptions in large companies, I bet soon we’ll see people using code generation to reduce boilerplate in Python source-code—a common practice with less dynamic languages.

For some projects and contexts, type hints just don’t make sense. Even in contexts where they mostly make sense, they don’t make sense all the time. Any reasonable policy about the use of type hints must have exceptions.

Alan Kay, the Turing Award laureate who pioneered object-oriented programming, once said:

> Some people are completely religious about type systems and as a mathematician I love the idea of type systems, but nobody has ever come up with one that has enough scope.[^21]

Thank Guido for optional typing. Let’s use it as intended, and not aim to annotate everything into strict conformity to a coding style that looks like Java 1.5.

Duck Typing FTW

Duck typing fits my brain, and static duck typing is a good compromise allowing static type checking without losing a lot of flexibility that some nominal type systems only provide with a lot of complexity—if ever.

Before PEP 544, this whole idea of type hints seemed utterly unPythonic to me. I was very glad to see `typing.Protocol` land in Python. It brings balance to the force.

Generics or Specifics?

From a Python perspective, the typing usage of the term “generic” is backward. Common meanings of “generic” are “applicable to an entire class or group” or “without a brand name.”

Consider `list` versus `list[str]`. The first is generic: it accepts any object. The second is specific: it only accepts `str`.

The term makes sense in Java, though. Before Java 1.5, all Java collections (except the magic `array`) were “specific”: they could only hold `Object` references, so we had to cast the items that came out of a collection to use them. With Java 1.5, collections got type parameters, and became “generic.”

[^1]: , “Rationale and Goals”; bold emphasis retained from the original.

[^2]:  A just-in-time compiler like the one in PyPy has much better data than type hints: it monitors the Python program as it runs, detects the concrete types in use, and generates optimized machine code for those concrete types.

[^3]: .

[^4]: .

[^5]: .

[^6]:  Inheritance is often overused and hard to justify in examples that are realistic yet simple, so please accept this animal example as a quick illustration of subtyping.

[^7]: .

[^8]:  == 1`. But the type system currently can’t express this constraint.

[^9]:  In ABC—the language that most influenced the initial design of Python—each list was constrained to accept values of a single type: the type of the first item you put into it.

[^10]:  into subsections, under the supervision of Guido van Rossum.

[^11]:  for all the gory details.

[^12]: ` is `True`, despite the fact that `dict` is implemented in C and does not inherit anything from `abc.MutableMapping`, but only from `object`.

[^13]:  module.

[^14]:  as of May 26, 2020.

[^15]:  How wonderful it is to open an interactive console and rely on duck typing to explore language features like I just did. I badly miss this kind of exploration when I use languages that don’t support it.

[^16]: .

[^17]:  I don’t know who invented the term _static duck typing_, but it became more popular with the Go language, which has interface semantics that are more like Python’s protocols than the nominal interfaces of Java.

[^18]:  REPL stands for Read-Eval-Print-Loop, the basic behavior of interactive interpreters.

[^19]: .

[^20]: . I did some light editing for clarity.

[^21]: .