# A Proper Look at Properties

Although often used as a decorator, the `property` built-in is actually a class. In Python, functions and classes are often interchangeable, because both are callable and there is no `new` operator for object instantiation, so invoking a constructor is no different from invoking a factory function. And both can be used as decorators, as long as they return a new callable that is a suitable replacement of the decorated callable.

This is the full signature of the `property` constructor:

```
property
```

All arguments are optional, and if a function is not provided for one of them, the corresponding operation is not allowed by the resulting property object.

The `property` type was added in Python 2.2, but the `@` decorator syntax appeared only in Python 2.4, so for a few years, properties were defined by passing the accessor functions as the first two arguments.

The “classic” syntax for defining properties without decorators is illustrated in [Example 22-22](#lineitem_class_v2b).

##### Example 22-22. bulkfood_v2b.py: same as [Example 22-21](#lineitem_class_v2), but without using decorators

```
class
```

[![^1]

A plain getter.

[![^2]

A plain setter.

[![^3]

Build the `property` and assign it to a public class attribute.

The classic form is better than the decorator syntax in some situations; the code of the property factory we’ll discuss shortly is one example. On the other hand, in a class body with many methods, the decorators make it explicit which are the getters and setters, without depending on the convention of using `get` and `set` prefixes in their names.

The presence of a property in a class affects how attributes in instances of that class can be found in a way that may be surprising at first. The next section explains.