### Subtype-of versus consistent-with

Traditional object-oriented nominal type systems rely on the is _subtype-of_ relationship. Given a class `T1` and a subclass `T2`, then `T2` is _subtype-of_ `T1`.

Consider this code:

```
class
```

The call `f1(o2)` is an application of the Liskov Substitution Principle—LSP. Barbara Liskov[^7] actually defined _is subtype-of_ in terms of supported operations: if an object of type `T2` substitutes an object of type `T1` and the program still behaves correctly, then `T2` is _subtype-of_ `T1`.

Continuing from the previous code, this shows a violation of the LSP:

```
def
```

From the point of view of supported operations, this makes perfect sense: as a subclass, `T2` inherits and must support all operations that `T1` does. So an instance of `T2` can be used anywhere an instance of `T1` is expected. But the reverse is not necessarily true: `T2` may implement additional methods, so an instance of `T1` may not be used everywhere an instance of `T2` is expected. This focus on supported operations is reflected in the name [_behavioral subtyping_](https://fpy.li/8-15), also used to refer to the LSP.

In a gradual type system, there is another relationship: _consistent-with_, which applies wherever _subtype-of_ applies, with special provisions for type `Any`.

The rules for _consistent-with_ are:

1. Given `T1` and a subtype `T2`, then `T2` is _consistent-with_ `T1` (Liskov substitution).
    
2. Every type is _consistent-with_ `Any`: you can pass objects of every type to an argument declared of type `Any`.
    
3. `Any` is _consistent-with_ every type: you can always pass an object of type `Any` where an argument of another type is expected.
    

Considering the previous definitions of the objects `o1` and `o2`, here are examples of valid code, illustrating rules #2 and #3:

```
def
```

Every gradual type system needs a wildcard type like `Any`.

###### Tip

The verb “to infer” is a fancy synomym for “to guess,” used in the context of type analysis. Modern type checkers in Python and other languages don’t require type annotations everywhere because they can infer the type of many expressions. For example, if I write `x = len(s) * 10`, the type checker doesn’t need an explicit local declaration to know that `x` is an `int`, as long as it can find type hints for the `len` built-in.

Now we can explore the rest of the types used in annotations.