## The Any Type

The keystone of any gradual type system is the `Any` type, also known as the _dynamic type_. When a type checker sees an untyped function like this:

```
def
```

it assumes this:

```
def
```

That means the `x` argument and the return value can be of any type, including different types. `Any` is assumed to support every possible operation.

Contrast `Any` with `object`. Consider this signature:

```
def
```

This function also accepts arguments of every type, because every type is a _subtype-of_ `object`.

However, a type checker will reject this function:

```
def
```

The problem is that `object` does not support the `__mul__` operation. This is what Mypy reports:

…/birds/ $ mypy double_object.py
double_object.py:2: error: Unsupported operand types for * ("object" and "int")
Found 1 error in 1 file (checked 1 source file)

More general types have narrower interfaces, i.e., they support fewer operations. The `object` class implements fewer operations than `abc.Sequence`, which implements fewer operations than `abc.MutableSequence`, which implements fewer operations than `list`.

But `Any` is a magic type that sits at the top and the bottom of the type hierarchy. It’s simultaneously the most general type—so that an argument `n: Any` accepts values of every type—and the most specialized type, supporting every possible operation. At least, that’s how the type checker understands `Any`.

Of course, no type can support every possible operation, so using `Any` prevents the type checker from fulfilling its core mission: detecting potentially illegal operations before your program crashes with a runtime exception.