# From Positional to Keyword-Only Parameters

One of the best features of Python functions is the extremely flexible parameter handling mechanism. Closely related are the use of `*` and `**` to unpack iterables and mappings into separate arguments when we call a function. To see these features in action, see the code for [Example 7-9](#tagger_ex) and tests showing its use in [Example 7-10](#tagger_demo).

##### Example 7-9. `tag` generates HTML elements; a keyword-only argument `class_` is used to pass “class” attributes as a workaround because `class` is a keyword in Python

```
def
```

The `tag` function can be invoked in many ways, as [Example 7-10](#tagger_demo) shows.

##### Example 7-10. Some of the many ways of calling the `tag` function from [Example 7-9](#tagger_ex)

```
>>
```

[![^1]

A single positional argument produces an empty `tag` with that name.

[![^2]

Any number of arguments after the first are captured by `*content` as a `tuple`.

[![^3]

Keyword arguments not explicitly named in the `tag` signature are captured by `**attrs` as a `dict`.

[![^4]

The `class_` parameter can only be passed as a keyword argument.

[![^5]

The first positional argument can also be passed as a keyword.

[![^6]

Prefixing the `my_tag` `dict` with `**` passes all its items as separate arguments, which are then bound to the named parameters, with the remaining caught by `**attrs`. In this case we can have a `'class'` key in the arguments `dict`, because it is a string, and does not clash with the `class` reserved word.

Keyword-only arguments are a feature of Python 3. In [Example 7-9](#tagger_ex), the `class_` parameter can only be given as a keyword argument—it will never capture unnamed positional arguments. To specify keyword-only arguments when defining a function, name them after the argument prefixed with `*`. If you don’t want to support variable positional arguments but still want keyword-only arguments, put a `*` by itself in the signature, like this:

```
>>> 
```

Note that keyword-only arguments do not need to have a default value: they can be mandatory, like `b` in the preceding example.