## Evaluation Time Experiments

Consider an _evaldemo.py_ script that uses a class decorator, a descriptor, and a class builder based on `__init_subclass__`, all defined in a _builderlib.py_ module. The modules have several `print` calls to show what happens under the covers. Otherwise, they don’t perform anything useful. The goal of these experiments is to observe the order in which these `print` calls happen.

###### Warning

Applying a class decorator and a class builder with `__init_subclass__` together in single class is likely a sign of overengineering or desperation. This unusual combination is useful in these experiments to show the timing of the changes that a class decorator and `__init_subclass__` can apply to a class.

Let’s start by checking out _builderlib.py_, split into two parts: [Example 24-10](#builderlib_top_ex) and [Example 24-11](#builderlib_bottom_ex).

##### Example 24-10. builderlib.py: top of the module

```
print
```

[![^1]

This is a class builder to implement…

[![^2]

…an `__init_subclass__` method.

[![^3]

Define a function to be added to the subclass in the assignment below.

[![^4]

A class decorator.

[![^5]

Function to be added to the decorated class.

[![^6]

Return the class received as an argument.

Continuing with _builderlib.py_ in [Example 24-11](#builderlib_bottom_ex)…

##### Example 24-11. builderlib.py: bottom of the module

```
class
```

[![^1]

A descriptor class to demonstrate when…

[![^2]

…a descriptor instance is created, and when…

[![^3]

…`__set_name__` will be invoked during the `owner` class construction.

[![^4]

Like the other methods, this `__set__` doesn’t do anything except display its arguments.

If you import _builderlib.py_ in the Python console, this is what you get:

```
>>> 
```

Note that the lines printed by _builderlib.py_ are prefixed with `@`.

Now let’s turn to _evaldemo.py_, which will trigger special methods in _builderlib.py_ ([Example 24-12](#evaldemo_ex)).

##### Example 24-12. evaldemo.py: script to experiment with _builderlib.py_

```
#!/usr/bin/env python3
```

[![^1]

Apply a decorator.

[![^2]

Subclass `Builder` to trigger its `__init_subclass__`.

[![^3]

Instantiate the descriptor.

[![^4]

This will only be called if the module is run as the main program.

The `print` calls in _evaldemo.py_ show a `#` prefix. If you open the console again and import _evaldemo.py_, [Example 24-13](#evaldemo_console_ex) is the output.

##### Example 24-13. Console experiment with _evaldemo.py_

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

The top four lines are the result of `from builderlib import…` . They will not appear if you didn’t close the console after the previous experiment, because _builderlib.py_ is already loaded.

[![^2]

This signals that Python started reading the body of `Klass`. At this point, the class object does not exist yet.

[![^3]

The descriptor instance is created and bound to `attr` in the namespace that Python will pass to the default class object constructor: `type.__new__`.

[![^4]

At this point, Python’s built-in `type.__new__` has created the `Klass` object and calls `__set_name__` on each descriptor instance of descriptor classes that provide that method, passing `Klass` as the `owner` argument.

[![^5]

`type.__new__` then calls `__init_subclass__` on the superclass of `Klass`, passing `Klass` as the single argument.

[![^6]

When `type.__new__` returns the class object, Python applies the decorator. In this example, the class returned by `deco` is bound to `Klass` in the module namespace.

The implementation of `type.__new__` is written in C. The behavior I just described is documented in the [“Creating the class object”](https://fpy.li/24-11) section of Python’s [“Data Model”](https://fpy.li/dtmodel) reference.

Note that the `main()` function of _evaldemo.py_ ([Example 24-12](#evaldemo_ex)) was not executed in the console session ([Example 24-13](#evaldemo_console_ex)), therefore no instance of `Klass` was created. All the action we saw was triggered by “import time” operations: importing `builderlib` and defining `Klass`.

If you run _evaldemo.py_ as a script, you will see the same output as [Example 24-13](#evaldemo_console_ex) with extra lines right before the end. The extra lines are the result of running `main()` ([Example 24-14](#evaldemo_script_ex)).

##### Example 24-14. Running _evaldemo.py_ as a program

$ ./evaldemo.py
[... 9 lines omitted ...]
@ deco(<class '__main__.Klass'>)  [![^1]
@ Builder.__init__(<Klass instance>)  [![^2]
# Klass.__init__(<Klass instance>)
@ SuperA.__init_subclass__:inner_0(<Klass instance>)  [![^3]
@ deco:inner_1(<Klass instance>)  [![^4]
@ Descriptor.__set__(<Descriptor instance>, <Klass instance>, 999)  [![^5]
# evaldemo module end

[![^1]

The top 10 lines—including this one—are the same as shown in [Example 24-13](#evaldemo_console_ex).

[![^2]

Triggered by `super().__init__()` in `Klass.__init__`.

[![^3]

Triggered by `obj.method_a()` in `main`; `method_a` was injected by `SuperA.__init_subclass__`.

[![^4]

Triggered by `obj.method_b()` in `main`; `method_b` was injected by `deco`.

[![^5]

Triggered by `obj.attr = 999` in `main`.

A base class with `__init_subclass__` and a class decorator are powerful tools, but they are limited to working with a class already built by `type.__new__` under the covers. In the rare occasions when you need to adjust the arguments passed to `type.__new__`, you need a metaclass. That’s the final destination of this chapter—and this book.