## Scheme Syntax

In Scheme there is no distinction between expressions and statements, like we have in Python. Also, there are no infix operators. All expressions use prefix notation like `(+ x 13)` instead of `x + 13`. The same prefix notation is used for function calls—e.g., `(gcd x 13)`—and special forms—e.g., `(define x 13)`, which we’d write as the assignment statement `x = 13` in Python. The notation used by Scheme and most Lisp dialects is known as _S-expression_.[^6]

[Example 18-10](#ex_gcd_scheme) shows a simple example in Scheme.

##### Example 18-10. Greatest common divisor in Scheme

```
(
```

[Example 18-10](#ex_gcd_scheme) shows three Scheme expressions: two function definitions—`mod` and `gcd`—and a call to `display`, which will output 9, the result of `(gcd 18 45)`. [Example 18-11](#ex_gcd_python) is the same code in Python (shorter than an English explanation of the recursive [_Euclidean algorithm_](https://fpy.li/18-14)).

##### Example 18-11. Same as [Example 18-10](#ex_gcd_scheme), written in Python

```
def
```

In idiomatic Python, I’d use the `%` operator instead of reinventing `mod`, and it would be more efficient to use a `while` loop instead of recursion. But I wanted to show two function definitions, and make the examples as similar as possible, to help you read the Scheme code.

Scheme has no iterative control flow commands like `while` or `for`. Iteration is done with recursion. Note how there are no assignments in the Scheme and Python examples. Extensive use of recursion and minimal use of assignment are hallmarks of programming in a functional style.[^7]

Now let’s review the code of the Python 3.10 version of _lis.py_. The complete source code with tests is in the [_18-with-match/lispy/py3.10/_](https://fpy.li/18-15) directory of the GitHub repository [_fluentpython/example-code-2e_](https://fpy.li/code).