## Procedure: A Class Implementing a Closure

The `Procedure` class could very well be named `Closure`, because that’s what it represents: a function definition together with an environment. The function definition includes the name of the parameters and the expressions that make up the body of the function. The environment is used when the function is called to provide the values of the _free variables_: variables that appear in the body of the function but are not parameters, local variables, or global variables. We saw the concepts of _closure_ and _free variable_ in [“Closures”](ch09.html#closures_sec).

We learned how to use closures in Python, but now we can dive deeper and see how a closure is implemented in _lis.py_:

```
class
```

[![^1]

Called when a function is defined by the `lambda` or `define` forms.

[![^2]

Save the parameter names, body expressions, and environment for later use.

[![^3]

Called by `proc(*values)` in the last line of the `case [func_exp, *args]` clause.

[![^4]

Build `local_env` mapping `self.parms` as local variable names, and the given `args` as values.

[![^5]

Build a new combined `env`, putting `local_env` first, and then `self.env`—the environment that was saved when the function was defined.

[![^6]

Iterate over each expression in `self.body`, evaluating it in the combined `env`.

[![^7]

Return the result of the last expression evaluated.

There are a couple of simple functions after `evaluate` in [_lis.py_](https://fpy.li/18-24): `run` reads a complete Scheme program and executes it, and `main` calls `run` or `repl`, depending on the command line—similar to what Python does. I will not describe those functions because there’s nothing new in them. My goals were to share with you the beauty of Norvig’s little interpreter, to give more insight into how closures work, and to show how `match/case` is a great addition to Python.

To wrap up this extended section on pattern matching, let’s formalize the concept of an OR-pattern.