## Parameterized Generics and TypeVar

A parameterized generic is a generic type, written as `list[T]`, where `T` is a type variable that will be bound to a specific type with each usage. This allows a parameter type to be reflected on the result type.

[Example 8-16](#generic_sample_ex) defines `sample`, a function that takes two arguments: a `Sequence` of elements of type `T`, and an `int`. It returns a `list` of elements of the same type `T`, picked at random from the first argument.

[Example 8-16](#generic_sample_ex) shows the implementation.

##### Example 8-16. _sample.py_

```
from
```

Here are two examples of why I used a type variable in `sample`:

- If called with a tuple of type `tuple[int, ...]`—which is _consistent-with_ `Sequence[int]`—then the type parameter is `int`, so the return type is `list[int]`.
    
- If called with a `str`—which is _consistent-with_ `Sequence[str]`—then the type parameter is `str`, so the return type is `list[str]`.
    

# Why Is TypeVar Needed?

The authors of PEP 484 wanted to introduce type hints by adding the `typing` module and not changing anything else in the language. With clever metaprogramming they could make the `[]` operator work on classes like `Sequence[T]`. But the name of the `T` variable inside the brackets must be defined somewhere—otherwise the Python interpreter would need deep changes to support generic type notation as special use of `[]`. That’s why the `typing.TypeVar` constructor is needed: to introduce the variable name in the current namespace. Languages such as Java, C#, and TypeScript don’t require the name of type variable to be declared beforehand, so they have no equivalent of Python’s `TypeVar` class.

Another example is the `statistics.mode` function from the standard library, which returns the most common data point from a series.

Here is one usage example from the [documentation](https://fpy.li/8-28):

```
>>> 
```

Without using a `TypeVar`, `mode` could have the signature shown in [Example 8-17](#mode_float_ex).

##### Example 8-17. _mode_float.py_: `mode` that operates on `float` and subtypes[^13]

```
from
```

Many uses of `mode` involve `int` or `float` values, but Python has other numerical types, and it is desirable that the return type follows the element type of the given `Iterable`. We can improve that signature using `TypeVar`. Let’s start with a simple, but wrong, parameterized signature:

```
from
```

When it first appears in the signature, the type parameter `T` can be any type. The second time it appears, it will mean the same type as the first.

Therefore, every iterable is _consistent-with_ `Iterable[T]`, including iterables of unhashable types that `collections.Counter` cannot handle. We need to restrict the possible types assigned to `T`. We’ll see two ways of doing that in the next two sections.