### Bounded TypeVar

Looking at the body of `mode` in [Example 8-17](#mode_float_ex), we see that the `Counter` class is used for ranking. Counter is based on `dict`, therefore the element type of the `data` iterable must be hashable.

At first, this signature may seem to work:

```
from
```

Now the problem is that the type of the returned item is `Hashable`: an ABC that implements only the `__hash__` method. So the type checker will not let us do anything with the return value except call `hash()` on it. Not very useful.

The solution is another optional parameter of `TypeVar`: the `bound` keyword parameter. It sets an upper boundary for the acceptable types. In [Example 8-18](#mode_hashable_ex), we have `bound=Hashable`, which means the type parameter may be `Hashable` or any _subtype-of_ it.[^14]

##### Example 8-18. _mode_hashable.py_: same as [Example 8-17](#mode_float_ex), with a more flexible signature

```
from
```

To summarize:

- A restricted type variable will be set to one of the types named in the `TypeVar` declaration.
    
- A bounded type variable will be set to the inferred type of the expression—as long as the inferred type is _consistent-with_ the boundary declared in the `bound=` keyword argument of `TypeVar`.
    

###### Note

It is unfortunate that the keyword argument to declare a bounded `TypeVar` is named `bound=`, because the verb “to bind” is commonly used to mean setting the value of a variable, which in the reference semantics of Python is best described as binding a name to the value. It would have been less confusing if the keyword argument was named `boundary=`.

The `typing.TypeVar` constructor has other optional parameters—`covariant` and `contravariant`—that we’ll cover in [Chapter 15](ch15.html#more_types_ch), [“Variance”](ch15.html#variance_sec).

Let’s conclude this introduction to `TypeVar` with `AnyStr`.