## Step 5: Caching Properties with functools

The `functools` module provides three decorators for caching. We saw `@cache` and `@lru_cache` in [“Memoization with functools.cache”](ch09.html#memoization_sec) ([Chapter 9](ch09.html#closures_and_decorators)). Python 3.8 introduced `@cached_property`.

The `functools.cached_property` decorator caches the result of the method in an instance attribute with the same name. For example, in [Example 22-17](#ex_schedule_v5_cached_property), the value computed by the `venue` method is stored in a `venue` attribute in `self`. After that, when client code tries to read `venue`, the newly created `venue` instance attribute is used instead of the method.

##### Example 22-17. Simple use of a `@cached_property`

    `@cached_property`
    `def` `venue``(``self``):`
        `key` `=` `f``'venue.{self.venue_serial}'`
        `return` `self``.``__class__``.``fetch``(``key``)`

In [“Step 3: Property Overriding an Existing Attribute”](#property_overriding_sec), we saw that a property shadows an instance attribute by the same name. If that is true, how can `@cached_property` work? If the property overrides the instance attribute, the `venue` attribute will be ignored and the `venue` method will always be called, computing the `key` and running `fetch` every time!

The answer is a bit sad: `cached_property` is a misnomer. The `@cached_property` decorator does not create a full-fledged property, it creates a _nonoverriding descriptor_. A descriptor is an object that manages the access to an attribute in another class. We will dive into descriptors in [Chapter 23](ch23.html#attribute_descriptors). The `property` decorator is a high-level API to create an _overriding descriptor_. [Chapter 23](ch23.html#attribute_descriptors) will include a through explanation about _overriding_ versus _nonoverriding_ descriptors.

For now, let us set aside the underlying implementation and focus on the differences between `cached_property` and `property` from a user’s point of view. Raymond Hettinger explains them very well in the [Python docs](https://fpy.li/22-9):

> The mechanics of `cached_property()` are somewhat different from `property()`. A regular property blocks attribute writes unless a setter is defined. In contrast, a `cached_property` allows writes.
> 
> The `cached_property` decorator only runs on lookups and only when an attribute of the same name doesn’t exist. When it does run, the `cached_property` writes to the attribute with the same name. Subsequent attribute reads and writes take precedence over the `cached_property` method and it works like a normal attribute.
> 
> The cached value can be cleared by deleting the attribute. This allows the `cached_property` method to run again.[^9]

Back to our `Event` class: the specific behavior of `@cached_property` makes it unsuitable to decorate `speakers`, because that method relies on an existing attribute also named `speakers`, containing the serial numbers of the event speakers.

###### Warning

`@cached_property` has some important limitations:

- It cannot be used as a drop-in replacement to `@property` if the decorated method already depends on an instance attribute with the same name.
    
- It cannot be used in a class that defines `__slots__`.
    
- It defeats the key-sharing optimization of the instance `__dict__`, because it creates an instance attribute after `__init__`.
    

Despite these limitations, `@cached_property` addresses a common need in a simple way, and it is thread safe. Its [Python code](https://fpy.li/22-13) is an example of using a [_reentrant lock_](https://fpy.li/22-14).

The `@cached_property` [documentation](https://fpy.li/22-15) recommends an alternative solution that we can use with `speakers`: stacking `@property` and `@cache` decorators, as shown in [Example 22-18](#ex_schedule_v5_property_over_cache).

##### Example 22-18. Stacking `@property` on `@cache`

```
    
```

[![^1]

The order is important: `@property` goes on top…

[![^2]

…of `@cache`.

Recall from [“Stacked Decorators”](ch09.html#stacked_decorators_tip) the meaning of that syntax. The top three lines of [Example 22-18](#ex_schedule_v5_property_over_cache) are similar to:

```
speakers
```

The `@cache` is applied to `speakers`, returning a new function. That function then is decorated by `@property`, which replaces it with a newly constructed property.

This wraps up our discussion of read-only properties and caching decorators, exploring the OSCON dataset. In the next section, we start a new series of examples creating read/write properties.