## Step 2: Property to Retrieve a Linked Record

The goal of this next version is: given an `event` record, reading its `venue` property will return a `Record`. This is similar to what the Django ORM does when you access a `ForeignKey` field: instead of the key, you get the linked model object.

We’ll start with the `venue` property. See the partial interaction in [Example 22-10](#ex_schedule_v2_demo) as an example.

##### Example 22-10. Extract from the doctests of schedule_v2.py

```
    
```

[![^1]

The `Record.fetch` static method gets a `Record` or an `Event` from the dataset.

[![^2]

Note that `event` is an instance of the `Event` class.

[![^3]

Accessing `event.venue` returns a `Record` instance.

[![^4]

Now it’s easy to find out the name of an `event.venue`.

[![^5]

The `Event` instance also has a `venue_serial` attribute, from the JSON data.

`Event` is a subclass of `Record` adding a `venue` to retrieve linked records, and a specialized `__repr__` method.

The code for this section is in the [_schedule_v2.py_](https://fpy.li/22-8) module in the [_Fluent Python_ code repository](https://fpy.li/code). The example has nearly 60 lines, so I’ll present it in parts, starting with the enhanced `Record` class.

##### Example 22-11. schedule_v2.py: `Record` class with a new `fetch` method

```
import
```

[![^1]

`inspect` will be used in `load`, listed in [Example 22-13](#ex_schedule_v2_load).

[![^2]

The `__index` private class attribute will eventually hold a reference to the `dict` returned by `load`.

[![^3]

`fetch` is a `staticmethod` to make it explicit that its effect is not influenced by the instance or class on which it is called.

[![^4]

Populate the `Record.__index`, if needed.

[![^5]

Use it to retrieve the record with the given `key`.

###### Tip

This is one example where the use of `staticmethod` makes sense. The `fetch` method always acts on the `Record.__index` class attribute, even if invoked from a subclass, like `Event.fetch()`—which we’ll soon explore. It would be misleading to code it as a class method because the `cls` first argument would not be used.

Now we get to the use of a property in the `Event` class, listed in [Example 22-12](#ex_schedule_v2_event).

##### Example 22-12. schedule_v2.py: the `Event` class

```
class
```

[![^1]

`Event` extends `Record`.

[![^2]

If the instance has a `name` attribute, it is used to produce a custom representation. Otherwise, delegate to the `__repr__` from `Record`.

[![^3]

The `venue` property builds a `key` from the `venue_serial` attribute, and passes it to the `fetch` class method, inherited from `Record` (the reason for using `self.__class__` is explained shortly).

The second line of the `venue` method of [Example 22-12](#ex_schedule_v2_event) returns `self​.__class__.fetch(key)`. Why not simply call `self.fetch(key)`? The simpler form works with the specific OSCON dataset because there is no event record with a `'fetch'` key. But, if an event record had a key named `'fetch'`, then within that specific `Event` instance, the reference `self.fetch` would retrieve the value of that field, instead of the `fetch` class method that `Event` inherits from `Record`. This is a subtle bug, and it could easily sneak through testing because it depends on the dataset.

###### Warning

When creating instance attribute names from data, there is always the risk of bugs due to shadowing of class attributes—such as methods—or data loss through accidental overwriting of existing instance attributes. These problems may explain why Python dicts are not like JavaScript objects in the first place.

If the `Record` class behaved more like a mapping, implementing a dynamic `__getitem__` instead of a dynamic `__getattr__`, there would be no risk of bugs from overwriting or shadowing. A custom mapping is probably the Pythonic way to implement `Record`. But if I took that road, we’d not be studying the tricks and traps of dynamic attribute programming.

The final piece of this example is the revised `load` function in [Example 22-13](#ex_schedule_v2_load).

##### Example 22-13. schedule_v2.py: the `load` function

```
def
```

[![^1]

So far, no changes from the `load` in _schedule_v1.py_ ([Example 22-9](#ex_schedule_v1)).

[![^2]

Capitalize the `record_type` to get a possible class name; e.g., `'event'` becomes `'Event'`.

[![^3]

Get an object by that name from the module global scope; get the `Record` class if there’s no such object.

[![^4]

If the object just retrieved is a class, and is a subclass of `Record`…

[![^5]

…bind the `factory` name to it. This means `factory` may be any subclass of `Record`, depending on the `record_type`.

[![^6]

Otherwise, bind the `factory` name to `Record`.

[![^7]

The `for` loop that creates the `key` and saves the records is the same as before, except that…

[![^8]

…the object stored in `records` is constructed by `factory`, which may be `Record` or a subclass like `Event`, selected according to the `record_type`.

Note that the only `record_type` that has a custom class is `Event`, but if classes named `Speaker` or `Venue` are coded, `load` will automatically use those classes when building and saving records, instead of the default `Record` class.

We’ll now apply the same idea to a new `speakers` property in the `Events` class.