### 3. Answer for asyncio

If you call `is_prime(5_000_111_000_222_021)` in the `slow` coroutine of the _spinner_async.py_ example, the spinner will never appear. The effect would be the same we had in [Example 19-6](#spinner_async_time_sleep_ex), when we replaced `await asyncio.sleep(3)` with `time.sleep(3)`: no spinning at all. The flow of control will pass from `supervisor` to `slow`, and then to `is_prime`. When `is_prime` returns, `slow` returns as well, and `supervisor` resumes, cancelling the `spinner` task before it is executed even once. The program appears frozen for about 3s, then shows the answer.

##### Power Napping with sleep(0)

One way to keep the spinner alive is to rewrite `is_prime` as a coroutine, and periodically call `asyncio.sleep(0)` in an `await` expression to yield control back to the event loop, like in [Example 19-11](#example-19-11).

##### Example 19-11. spinner_async_nap.py: `is_prime` is now a coroutine

```
async
```

[![^1]

Sleep once every 50,000 iterations (because the step in the `range` is 2).

[Issue #284](https://fpy.li/19-20) in the `asyncio` repository has an informative discussion about the use of `asyncio.sleep(0)`.

However, be aware this will slow down `is_prime`, and—more importantly—will still slow down the event loop and your whole program with it. When I used `await asyncio.sleep(0)` every 100,000 iterations, the spinner was smooth but the program ran in 4.9s on my machine, almost 50% longer than the original `primes.is_prime` function by itself with the same argument (`5_000_111_000_222_021`).

Using `await asyncio.sleep(0)` should be considered a stopgap measure before you refactor your asynchronous code to delegate CPU-intensive computations to another process. We’ll see one way of doing that with [`asyncio.loop.run_in_executor`](https://fpy.li/19-21), covered in [Chapter 21](ch21.html#async_ch). Another option would be a task queue, which we’ll briefly discuss in [“Distributed Task Queues”](#distributed_task_queues_sec).

So far, we’ve only experimented with a single call to a CPU-intensive function. The next section presents concurrent execution of multiple CPU-intensive calls.