## Example: Coroutine to Compute a Running Average

While discussing closures in [Chapter 9](ch09.html#closures_and_decorators), we studied objects to compute a running average. [Example 9-7](ch09.html#ex_average_oo) shows a class and [Example 9-13](ch09.html#ex_average_fixed) presents a higher-order function returning a function that keeps the `total` and `count` variables across invocations in a closure. [Example 17-37](#ex_coroaverager) shows how to do the same with a coroutine.[^13]

##### Example 17-37. coroaverager.py: coroutine to compute a running average

```
from
```

[![^1]

This function returns a generator that yields `float` values, accepts `float` values via `.send()`, and does not return a useful value.[^14]

[![^2]

This infinite loop means the coroutine will keep on yielding averages as long as the client code sends values.

[![^3]

The `yield` statement here suspends the coroutine, yields a result to the client, and—later—gets a value sent by the caller to the coroutine, starting another iteration of the infinite loop.

In a coroutine, `total` and `count` can be local variables: no instance attributes or closures are needed to keep the context while the coroutine is suspended waiting for the next `.send()`. That’s why coroutines are attractive replacements for callbacks in asynchronous programming—they keep local state between activations.

[Example 17-38](#ex_coroaverager_test) runs doctests to show the `averager` coroutine in operation.

##### Example 17-38. coroaverager.py: doctest for the running average coroutine in [Example 17-37](#ex_coroaverager)

```
    
```

[![^1]

Create the coroutine object.

[![^2]

Start the coroutine. This yields the initial value of `average`: 0.0.

[![^3]

Now we are in business: each call to `.send()` yields the current average.

In [Example 17-38](#ex_coroaverager_test), the call `next(coro_avg)` makes the coroutine advance to the `yield`, yielding the initial value for `average`. You can also start the coroutine by calling `coro_avg.send(None)`—this is actually what the `next()` built-in does. But you can’t send any value other than `None`, because the coroutine can only accept a sent value when it is suspended at a `yield` line. Calling `next()` or `.send(None)` to advance to the first `yield` is known as “priming the coroutine.”

After each activation, the coroutine is suspended precisely at the `yield` keyword, waiting for a value to be sent. The line `coro_avg.send(10)` provides that value, causing the coroutine to activate. The `yield` expression resolves to the value 10, assigning it to the `term` variable. The rest of the loop updates the `total`, `count`, and `average` variables. The next iteration in the `while` loop yields the `average`, and the coroutine is again suspended at the `yield` keyword.

The attentive reader may be anxious to know how the execution of an `averager` instance (e.g., `coro_avg`) may be terminated, because its body is an infinite loop. We don’t usually need to terminate a generator, because it is garbage collected as soon as there are no more valid references to it. If you need to explicitly terminate it, use the `.close()` method, as shown in [Example 17-39](#ex_coroaverager_test_cont).

##### Example 17-39. coroaverager.py: continuing from [Example 17-38](#ex_coroaverager_test)

```
    
```

[![^1]

`coro_avg` is the instance created in [Example 17-38](#ex_coroaverager_test).

[![^2]

The `.close()` method raises `GeneratorExit` at the suspended `yield` expression. If not handled in the coroutine function, the exception terminates it. `GeneratorExit` is caught by the generator object that wraps the coroutine—that’s why we don’t see it.

[![^3]

Calling `.close()` on a previously closed coroutine has no effect.

[![^4]

Trying `.send()` on a closed coroutine raises `StopIteration`.

Besides the `.send()` method, [PEP 342—Coroutines via Enhanced Generators](https://fpy.li/pep342) also introduced a way for a coroutine to return a value. The next section shows how.