# Generic Iterable Types

Python’s standard library has many functions that accept iterable arguments. In your code, such functions can be annotated like the `zip_replace` function we saw in [Example 8-15](ch08.html#replacer_ex), using `collections.abc.Iterable` (or `typing.Iterable` if you must support Python 3.8 or earlier, as explained in [“Legacy Support and Deprecated Collection Types”](ch08.html#legacy_deprecated_typing_box)). See [Example 17-34](#replacer_iterable_ex).

##### Example 17-34. replacer.py returns an iterator of tuples of strings

```
from
```

[![^1]

Define type alias; not required, but makes the next type hint more readable. Starting with Python 3.10, `FromTo` should have a type hint of `typing.TypeAlias` to clarify the reason for this line: `FromTo: TypeAlias = tuple[str, str]`.

[![^2]

Annotate `changes` to accept an `Iterable` of `FromTo` tuples.

`Iterator` types don’t appear as often as `Iterable` types, but they are also simple to write. [Example 17-35](#fibo_gen_annot_ex) shows the familiar Fibonacci generator, annotated.

##### Example 17-35. _fibo_gen.py_: `fibonacci` returns a generator of integers

```
from
```

Note that the type `Iterator` is used for generators coded as functions with `yield`, as well as iterators written “by hand” as classes with `__next__`. There is also a `collections.abc.Generator` type (and the corresponding deprecated `typing.Generator`) that we can use to annotate generator objects, but it is needlessly verbose for generators used as iterators.

[Example 17-36](#iter_gen_type_ex), when checked with Mypy, reveals that the `Iterator` type is really a simplified special case of the `Generator` type.

##### Example 17-36. itergentype.py: two ways to annotate iterators

```
from
```

[![^1]

Generator expression that yields Python keywords with less than `5` characters.

[![^2]

Mypy infers: `typing.Generator[builtins.str*, None, None]`.[^11]

[![^3]

This also yields strings, but I added an explicit type hint.

[![^4]

Revealed type: `typing.Iterator[builtins.str]`.

`abc.Iterator[str]` is _consistent-with_ `abc.Generator[str, None, None]`, therefore Mypy issues no errors for type checking in [Example 17-36](#iter_gen_type_ex).

`Iterator[T]` is a shortcut for `Generator[T, None, None]`. Both annotations mean “a generator that yields items of type `T`, but that does not consume or return values.” Generators able to consume and return values are coroutines, our next topic.