## How a Generator Works

Any Python function that has the `yield` keyword in its body is a generator function: a function which, when called, returns a generator object. In other words, a generator function is a generator factory.

###### Tip

The only syntax distinguishing a plain function from a generator function is the fact that the latter has a `yield` keyword somewhere in its body. Some argued that a new keyword like `gen` should be used instead of `def` to declare generator functions, but Guido did not agree. His arguments are in [PEP 255 — Simple Generators](https://fpy.li/pep255).[^5]

[Example 17-6](#gen-func-ex-three-yield) shows the behavior of a simple generator function.[^6]

##### Example 17-6. A generator function that yields three numbers

>>> def gen_123():
...     yield 1  [![^1]
...     yield 2
...     yield 3
...
>>> gen_123  # doctest: +ELLIPSIS
<function gen_123 at 0x...>  [![^2]
>>> gen_123()   # doctest: +ELLIPSIS
<generator object gen_123 at 0x...>  [![^3]
>>> for i in gen_123():  [![^4]
...     print(i)
1
2
3
>>> g = gen_123()  [![^5]
>>> next(g)  [![^6]
1
>>> next(g)
2
>>> next(g)
3
>>> next(g)  [![^7]
Traceback (most recent call last):
  ...
StopIteration

[![^1]

The body of a generator function often has `yield` inside a loop, but not necessarily; here I just repeat `yield` three times.

[![^2]

Looking closely, we see `gen_123` is a function object.

[![^3]

But when invoked, `gen_123()` returns a generator object.

[![^4]

Generator objects implement the `Iterator` interface, so they are also iterable.

[![^5]

We assign this new generator object to `g`, so we can experiment with it.

[![^6]

Because `g` is an iterator, calling `next(g)` fetches the next item produced by `yield`.

[![^7]

When the generator function returns, the generator object raises `StopIteration`.

A generator function builds a generator object that wraps the body of the function. When we invoke `next()` on the generator object, execution advances to the next `yield` in the function body, and the `next()` call evaluates to the value yielded when the function body is suspended. Finally, the enclosing generator object created by Python raises `StopIteration` when the function body returns, in accordance with the `Iterator` protocol.

###### Tip

I find it helpful to be rigorous when talking about values obtained from a generator. It’s confusing to say a generator “returns” values. Functions return values. Calling a generator function returns a generator. A generator yields values. A generator doesn’t “return” values in the usual way: the `return` statement in the body of a generator function causes `StopIteration` to be raised by the generator object. If you `return x` in the generator, the caller can retrieve the value of `x` from the `StopIteration` exception, but usually that is done automatically using the `yield from` syntax, as we’ll see in [“Returning a Value from a Coroutine”](#coro_return_sec).

[Example 17-7](#ex_gen_ab) makes the interaction between a `for` loop and the body of the function more explicit.

##### Example 17-7. A generator function that prints messages when it runs

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

The first implicit call to `next()` in the `for` loop at ![^4] will print `'start'` and stop at the first `yield`, producing the value `'A'`.

[![^2]

The second implicit call to `next()` in the `for` loop will print `'continue'` and stop at the second `yield`, producing the value `'B'`.

[![^3]

The third call to `next()` will print `'end.'` and fall through the end of the function body, causing the generator object to raise `StopIteration`.

[![^4]

To iterate, the `for` machinery does the equivalent of `g = iter(gen_AB())` to get a generator object, and then `next(g)` at each iteration.

[![^5]

The loop prints `-->` and the value returned by `next(g)`. This output will appear only after the output of the `print` calls inside the generator function.

[![^6]

The text `start` comes from `print('start')` in the generator body.

[![^7]

`yield 'A'` in the generator body yields the value _A_ consumed by the `for` loop, which gets assigned to the `c` variable and results in the output `--> A`.

[![^8]

Iteration continues with a second call to `next(g)`, advancing the generator body from `yield 'A'` to `yield 'B'`. The text `continue` is output by the second `print` in the generator body.

[![^9]

`yield 'B'` yields the value _B_ consumed by the `for` loop, which gets assigned to the `c` loop variable, so the loop prints `--> B`.

[![^10]

Iteration continues with a third call to `next(it)`, advancing to the end of the body of the function. The text `end.` appears in the output because of the third `print` in the generator body.

[![^11]

When the generator function runs to the end, the generator object raises `StopIteration`. The `for` loop machinery catches that exception, and the loop terminates cleanly.

Now hopefully it’s clear how `Sentence.__iter__` in [Example 17-5](#ex_sentence2) works: `__iter__` is a generator function which, when called, builds a generator object that implements the `Iterator` interface, so the `SentenceIterator` class is no longer needed.

That second version of `Sentence` is more concise than the first, but it’s not as lazy as it could be. Nowadays, laziness is considered a good trait, at least in programming languages and APIs. A lazy implementation postpones producing values to the last possible moment. This saves memory and may avoid wasting CPU cycles, too.

We’ll build lazy `Sentence` classes next.