## Sentence Take #2: A Classic Iterator

The next `Sentence` implementation follows the blueprint of the classic Iterator design pattern from the _Design Patterns_ book. Note that it is not idiomatic Python, as the next refactorings will make very clear. But it is useful to show the distinction between an iterable collection and an iterator that works with it.

The `Sentence` class in [Example 17-4](#ex_sentence1) is iterable because it implements the `__iter__` special method, which builds and returns a `SentenceIterator`. That’s how an iterable and an iterator are related.

##### Example 17-4. sentence_iter.py: `Sentence` implemented using the Iterator pattern

```
import
```

[![^1]

The `__iter__` method is the only addition to the previous `Sentence` implementation. This version has no `__getitem__`, to make it clear that the class is iterable because it implements `__iter__`.

[![^2]

`__iter__` fulfills the iterable protocol by instantiating and returning an iterator.

[![^3]

`SentenceIterator` holds a reference to the list of words.

[![^4]

`self.index` determines the next word to fetch.

[![^5]

Get the word at `self.index`.

[![^6]

If there is no word at `self.index`, raise `StopIteration`.

[![^7]

Increment `self.index`.

[![^8]

Return the word.

[![^9]

Implement `self.__iter__`.

The code in [Example 17-4](#ex_sentence1) passes the tests in [Example 17-2](#demo_sentence0).

Note that implementing `__iter__` in `SentenceIterator` is not actually needed for this example to work, but it is the right thing to do: iterators are supposed to implement both `__next__` and `__iter__`, and doing so makes our iterator pass the `issubclass(SentenceIterator, abc.Iterator)` test. If we had subclassed `SentenceIterator` from `abc.Iterator`, we’d inherit the concrete `abc.Iterator.__iter__` method.

That is a lot of work (for us spoiled Python programmers, anyway). Note how most code in `SentenceIterator` deals with managing the internal state of the iterator. Soon we’ll see how to avoid that bookkeeping. But first, a brief detour to address an implementation shortcut that may be tempting, but is just wrong.