# Generator Functions in the Standard Library

The standard library provides many generators, from plain-text file objects providing line-by-line iteration, to the awesome [`os.walk`](https://fpy.li/17-12) function, which yields filenames while traversing a directory tree, making recursive filesystem searches as simple as a `for` loop.

The `os.walk` generator function is impressive, but in this section I want to focus on general-purpose functions that take arbitrary iterables as arguments and return generators that yield selected, computed, or rearranged items. In the following tables, I summarize two dozen of them, from the built-in, `itertools`, and `functools` modules. For convenience, I grouped them by high-level functionality, regardless of where they are defined.

The first group contains the filtering generator functions: they yield a subset of items produced by the input iterable, without changing the items themselves. Like `takewhile`, most functions listed in [Table 17-1](#filter_genfunc_tbl) take a `predicate`, which is a one-argument Boolean function that will be applied to each item in the input to determine whether the item is included in the output.

Table 17-1. Filtering generator functions
|Module|Function|Description|
|---|---|---|
|`itertools`|`compress(it, selector_it)`|Consumes two iterables in parallel; yields items from `it` whenever the corresponding item in `selector_it` is truthy|
|`itertools`|`dropwhile(predicate, it)`|Consumes `it`, skipping items while `predicate` computes truthy, then yields every remaining item (no further checks are made)|
|(built-in)|`filter(predicate, it)`|Applies `predicate` to each item of `iterable`, yielding the item if `predicate(item)` is truthy; if `predicate` is `None`, only truthy items are yielded|
|`itertools`|`filterfalse(predicate, it)`|Same as `filter`, with the `predicate` logic negated: yields items whenever `predicate` computes falsy|
|`itertools`|`islice(it, stop) or islice(it, start, stop, step=1)`|Yields items from a slice of `it`, similar to `s[:stop]` or `s[start:stop:step]` except `it` can be any iterable, and the operation is lazy|
|`itertools`|`takewhile(predicate, it)`|Yields items while `predicate` computes truthy, then stops and no further checks are made|

The console listing in [Example 17-15](#demo_filter_genfunc) shows the use of all the functions in [Table 17-1](#filter_genfunc_tbl).

##### Example 17-15. Filtering generator functions examples

```
>>> 
```

The next group contains the mapping generators: they yield items computed from each individual item in the input iterable—or iterables, in the case of `map` and `starmap`.[^9] yield one result per item in the input iterables. If the input comes from more than one iterable, the output stops as soon as the first input iterable is exhausted.

Table 17-2. Mapping generator functions
|Module|Function|Description|
|---|---|---|
|`itertools`|`accumulate(it, [func])`|Yields accumulated sums; if `func` is provided, yields the result of applying it to the first pair of items, then to the first result and next item, etc.|
|(built-in)|`enumerate(iterable, start=0)`|Yields 2-tuples of the form `(index, item)`, where `index` is counted from `start`, and `item` is taken from the `iterable`|
|(built-in)|`map(func, it1, [it2, …, itN])`|Applies `func` to each item of `it`, yielding the result; if N iterables are given, `func` must take N arguments and the iterables will be consumed in parallel|
|`itertools`|`starmap(func, it)`|Applies `func` to each item of `it`, yielding the result; the input iterable should yield iterable items `iit`, and `func` is applied as `func(*iit)`|

[Example 17-16](#demo_accumulate_genfunc) demonstrates some uses of `itertools.accumulate`.

##### Example 17-16. `itertools.accumulate` generator function examples

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Running sum.

[![^2]

Running minimum.

[![^3]

Running maximum.

[![^4]

Running product.

[![^5]

Factorials from `1!` to `10!`.

The remaining functions of [Table 17-2](#mapping_genfunc_tbl) are shown in [Example 17-17](#demo_mapping_genfunc).

##### Example 17-17. Mapping generator function examples

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Number the letters in the word, starting from `1`.

[![^2]

Squares of integers from `0` to `10`.

[![^3]

Multiplying numbers from two iterables in parallel: results stop when the shortest iterable ends.

[![^4]

This is what the `zip` built-in function does.

[![^5]

Repeat each letter in the word according to its place in it, starting from `1`.

[![^6]

Running average.

Next, we have the group of merging generators—all of these yield items from multiple input iterables. `chain` and `chain.from_iterable` consume the input iterables sequentially (one after the other), while `product`, `zip`, and `zip_longest` consume the input iterables in parallel. See [Table 17-3](#merging_genfunc_tbl).

Table 17-3. Generator functions that merge multiple input iterables
|Module|Function|Description|
|---|---|---|
|`itertools`|`chain(it1, …, itN)`|Yields all items from `it1`, then from `it2`, etc., seamlessly|
|`itertools`|`chain.from_iterable(it)`|Yields all items from each iterable produced by `it`, one after the other, seamlessly; `it` will be an iterable where the items are also iterables, for example, a list of tuples|
|`itertools`|`product(it1, …, itN, repeat=1)`|Cartesian product: yields N-tuples made by combining items from each input iterable, like nested `for` loops could produce; `repeat` allows the input iterables to be consumed more than once|
|(built-in)|`zip(it1, …, itN, strict=False)`|Yields N-tuples built from items taken from the iterables in parallel, silently stopping when the first iterable is exhausted, unless `strict=True` is given[a](ch17.html#idm46582402726080)|
|`itertools`|`zip_longest(it1, …, itN, fillvalue=None)`|Yields N-tuples built from items taken from the iterables in parallel, stopping only when the last iterable is exhausted, filling the blanks with the `fillvalue`|
|[a](ch17.html#idm46582402726080-marker) The `strict` keyword-only argument is new in Python 3.10. When `strict=True`, `ValueError` is raised if any iterable has a different length. The default is `False`, for backward compatibility.|   |   |

[Example 17-18](#demo_merging_genfunc) shows the use of the `itertools.chain` and `zip` generator functions and their siblings. Recall that the `zip` function is named after the zip fastener or zipper (no relation to compression). Both `zip` and `itertools.zip_longest` were introduced in [“The Awesome zip”](ch12.html#zip_box).

##### Example 17-18. Merging generator function examples

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`chain` is usually called with two or more iterables.

[![^2]

`chain` does nothing useful when called with a single iterable.

[![^3]

But `chain.from_iterable` takes each item from the iterable, and chains them in sequence, as long as each item is itself iterable.

[![^4]

Any number of iterables can be consumed by `zip` in parallel, but the generator always stops as soon as the first iterable ends. In Python ≥ 3.10, if the `strict=True` argument is given and an iterable ends before the others, `ValueError` is raised.

[![^5]

`itertools.zip_longest` works like `zip`, except it consumes all input iterables to the end, padding output tuples with `None`, as needed.

[![^6]

The `fillvalue` keyword argument specifies a custom padding value.

The `itertools.product` generator is a lazy way of computing Cartesian products, which we built using list comprehensions with more than one `for` clause in [“Cartesian Products”](ch02.html#cartesian_product_sec). Generator expressions with multiple `for` clauses can also be used to produce Cartesian products lazily. [Example 17-19](#demo_product_genfunc) demonstrates `itertools.product`.

##### Example 17-19. `itertools.product` generator function examples

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

The Cartesian product of a `str` with three characters and a `range` with two integers yields six tuples (because `3 * 2` is `6`).

[![^2]

The product of two card ranks (`'AK'`) and four suits is a series of eight tuples.

[![^3]

Given a single iterable, `product` yields a series of one-tuples—not very useful.

[![^4]

The `repeat=N` keyword argument tells the product to consume each input iterable `N` times.

Some generator functions expand the input by yielding more than one value per input item. They are listed in [Table 17-4](#expanding_genfunc_tbl).

Table 17-4. Generator functions that expand each input item into multiple output items
|Module|Function|Description|
|---|---|---|
|`itertools`|`combinations(it, out_len)`|Yields combinations of `out_len` items from the items yielded by `it`|
|`itertools`|`combinations_with_replacement(it, out_len)`|Yields combinations of `out_len` items from the items yielded by `it`, including combinations with repeated items|
|`itertools`|`count(start=0, step=1)`|Yields numbers starting at `start`, incremented by `step`, indefinitely|
|`itertools`|`cycle(it)`|Yields items from `it`, storing a copy of each, then yields the entire sequence repeatedly, indefinitely|
|`itertools`|`pairwise(it)`|Yields successive overlapping pairs taken from the input iterable[a](ch17.html#idm46582402272512)|
|`itertools`|`permutations(it, out_len=None)`|Yields permutations of `out_len` items from the items yielded by `it`; by default, `out_len` is `len(list(it))`|
|`itertools`|`repeat(item, [times])`|Yields the given item repeatedly, indefinitely unless a number of `times` is given|
|[a](ch17.html#idm46582402272512-marker) `itertools.pairwise` was added in Python 3.10.|   |   |

The `count` and `repeat` functions from `itertools` return generators that conjure items out of nothing: neither of them takes an iterable as input. We saw `itertools.count` in [“Arithmetic Progression with itertools”](#ap_itertools_sec). The `cycle` generator makes a backup of the input iterable and yields its items repeatedly. [Example 17-20](#demo_count_repeat_genfunc) illustrates the use of `count`, `cycle`, `pairwise`, and `repeat`.

##### Example 17-20. `count`, `cycle`, `pairwise`, and `repeat`

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Build a `count` generator `ct`.

[![^2]

Retrieve the first item from `ct`.

[![^3]

I can’t build a `list` from `ct`, because `ct` never stops, so I fetch the next three items.

[![^4]

I can build a `list` from a `count` generator if it is limited by `islice` or `takewhile`.

[![^5]

Build a `cycle` generator from `'ABC'` and fetch its first item, `'A'`.

[![^6]

A `list` can only be built if limited by `islice`; the next seven items are retrieved here.

[![^7]

For each item in the input, `pairwise` yields a 2-tuple with that item and the next—if there is a next item. Available in Python ≥ 3.10.

[![^8]

Build a `repeat` generator that will yield the number `7` forever.

[![^9]

A `repeat` generator can be limited by passing the `times` argument: here the number `8` will be produced `4` times.

[![^10]

A common use of `repeat`: providing a fixed argument in `map`; here it provides the `5` multiplier.

The `combinations`, `combinations_with_replacement`, and `permutations` generator functions—together with `product`—are called the _combinatorics generators_ in the [`itertools` documentation page](https://fpy.li/17-13). There is a close relationship between `itertools.product` and the remaining _combinatoric_ functions as well, as [Example 17-21](#demo_conbinatoric_genfunc) shows.

##### Example 17-21. Combinatoric generator functions yield multiple values per input item

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

All combinations of `len()==2` from the items in `'ABC'`; item ordering in the generated tuples is irrelevant (they could be sets).

[![^2]

All combinations of `len()==2` from the items in `'ABC'`, including combinations with repeated items.

[![^3]

All permutations of `len()==2` from the items in `'ABC'`; item ordering in the generated tuples is relevant.

[![^4]

Cartesian product from `'ABC'` and `'ABC'` (that’s the effect of `repeat=2`).

The last group of generator functions we’ll cover in this section are designed to yield all items in the input iterables, but rearranged in some way. Here are two functions that return multiple generators: `itertools.groupby` and `itertools.tee`. The other generator function in this group, the `reversed` built-in, is the only one covered in this section that does not accept any iterable as input, but only sequences. This makes sense: because `reversed` will yield the items from last to first, it only works with a sequence with a known length. But it avoids the cost of making a reversed copy of the sequence by yielding each item as needed. I put the `itertools.product` function together with the _merging_ generators in [Table 17-3](#merging_genfunc_tbl) because they all consume more than one iterable, while the generators in [Table 17-5](#expanding_genfunc_tbl2) all accept at most one input iterable.

Table 17-5. Rearranging generator functions
|Module|Function|Description|
|---|---|---|
|`itertools`|`groupby(it, key=None)`|Yields 2-tuples of the form `(key, group)`, where `key` is the grouping criterion and `group` is a generator yielding the items in the group|
|(built-in)|`reversed(seq)`|Yields items from `seq` in reverse order, from last to first; `seq` must be a sequence or implement the `__reversed__` special method|
|`itertools`|`tee(it, n=2)`|Yields a tuple of _n_ generators, each yielding the items of the input iterable independently|

[Example 17-22](#demo_groupby_reversed_genfunc) demonstrates the use of `itertools.groupby` and the `reversed` built-in. Note that `itertools.groupby` assumes that the input iterable is sorted by the grouping criterion, or at least that the items are clustered by that criterion—even if not completely sorted. Tech reviewer Miroslav Šedivý suggested this use case: you can sort the `datetime` objects chronologically, then `groupby` weekday to get a group of Monday data, followed by Tuesday data, etc., and then by Monday (of the next week) again, and so on.

##### Example 17-22. `itertools.groupby`

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`groupby` yields tuples of `(key, group_generator)`.

[![^2]

Handling `groupby` generators involves nested iteration: in this case, the outer `for` loop and the inner `list` constructor.

[![^3]

Sort `animals` by length.

[![^4]

Again, loop over the `key` and `group` pair, to display the `key` and expand the `group` into a `list`.

[![^5]

Here the `reverse` generator iterates over `animals` from right to left.

The last of the generator functions in this group is `iterator.tee`, which has a unique behavior: it yields multiple generators from a single input iterable, each yielding every item from the input. Those generators can be consumed independently, as shown in [Example 17-23](#demo_tee_genfunc).

##### Example 17-23. `itertools.tee` yields multiple generators, each yielding every item of the input generator

```
>>> 
```

Note that several examples in this section used combinations of generator functions. This is a great feature of these functions: because they take generators as arguments and return generators, they can be combined in many different ways.

Now we’ll review another group of iterable-savvy functions in the standard library.