# Enhancing Classes with a Class Decorator

A class decorator is a callable that behaves similarly to a function decorator: it gets the decorated class as an argument, and should return a class to replace the decorated class. Class decorators often return the decorated class itself, after injecting more methods in it via attribute assignment.

Probably the most common reason to choose a class decorator over the simpler `__init_subclass__` is to avoid interfering with other class features, such as inheritance and metaclasses.[^10]

In this section, we’ll study _checkeddeco.py_, which provides the same service as _checkedlib.py_, but using a class decorator. As usual, we’ll start by looking at a usage example, extracted from the doctests in _checkeddeco.py_ ([Example 24-7](#checkeddeco_demo1_ex)).

##### Example 24-7. checkeddeco.py: creating a `Movie` class decorated with `@checked`

    `>>>` `@checked`
    `...` `class` `Movie``:`
    `...`     `title``:` `str`
    `...`     `year``:` `int`
    `...`     `box_office``:` `float`
    `...`
    `>>>` `movie` `=` `Movie``(``title``=``'The Godfather'``,` `year``=``1972``,` `box_office``=``137``)`
    `>>>` `movie``.``title`
    `'The Godfather'`
    `>>>` `movie`
    `Movie``(``title``=``'The Godfather'``,` `year``=``1972``,` `box_office``=``137.0``)`

The only difference between [Example 24-7](#checkeddeco_demo1_ex) and [Example 24-3](#checked_demo1_ex) is the way the `Movie` class is declared: it is decorated with `@checked` instead of subclassing `Checked`. Otherwise, the external behavior is the same, including the type validation and default value assignments shown after [Example 24-3](#checked_demo1_ex) in [“Introducing __init_subclass__”](#enhancing_with_init_subclass).

Now let’s look at the implementation of _checkeddeco.py_. The imports and `Field` class are the same as in _checkedlib.py_, listed in [Example 24-4](#checked_field_ex). There is no other class, only functions in _checkeddeco.py_.

The logic previously implemented in `__init_subclass__` is now part of the `checked` function—the class decorator listed in [Example 24-8](#checkeddeco_decorators_ex).

##### Example 24-8. checkeddeco.py: the class decorator

```
def
```

[![^1]

Recall that classes are instances of `type`. These type hints strongly suggest this is a class decorator: it takes a class and returns a class.

[![^2]

`_fields` is a top-level function defined later in the module (in [Example 24-9](#checkeddeco_methods_ex)).

[![^3]

Replacing each attribute returned by `_fields` with a `Field` descriptor instance is what `__init_subclass__` did in [Example 24-5](#checked_class_top_ex). Here there is more work to do…

[![^4]

Build a class method from `_fields`, and add it to the decorated class. The `type: ignore` comment is needed because Mypy complains that `type` has no `_fields` attribute.

[![^5]

Module-level functions that will become instance methods of the decorated class.

[![^6]

Add each of the `instance_methods` to `cls`.

[![^7]

Return the decorated `cls`, fulfilling the essential contract of a class decorator.

Every top-level function in _checkeddeco.py_ is prefixed with an underscore, except the `checked` decorator. This naming convention makes sense for a couple of reasons:

- `checked` is part of the public interface of the _checkeddeco.py_ module, but the other functions are not.
    
- The functions in [Example 24-9](#checkeddeco_methods_ex) will be injected in the decorated class, and the leading `_` reduces the chance of naming conflicts with user-defined attributes and methods of the decorated class.
    

The rest of _checkeddeco.py_ is listed in [Example 24-9](#checkeddeco_methods_ex). Those module-level functions have the same code as the corresponding methods of the `Checked` class of _checkedlib.py_. They were explained in Examples [24-5](#checked_class_top_ex) and [24-6](#checked_class_bottom_ex).

Note that the `_fields` function does double duty in _checkeddeco.py_. It is used as a regular function in the first line of the `checked` decorator, and it will also be injected as a class method of the decorated class.

##### Example 24-9. checkeddeco.py: the methods to be injected in the decorated class

```
def
```

The _checkeddeco.py_ module implements a simple but usable class decorator. Python’s `@dataclass` does a lot more. It supports many configuration options, adds more methods to the decorated class, handles or warns about conflicts with user-defined methods in the decorated class, and even traverses the `__mro__` to collect user-defined attributes declared in the superclasses of the decorated class. The [source code](https://fpy.li/24-10) of the `dataclasses` package in Python 3.9 is more than 1,200 lines long.

For metaprogramming classes, we must be aware of when the Python interpreter evaluates each block of code during the construction of a class. This is covered next.