## Static Protocols

###### Note

In object-oriented programming, the concept of a “protocol” as an informal interface is as old as Smalltalk, and is an essential part of Python from the beginning. However, in the context of type hints, a protocol is a `typing.Protocol` subclass defining an interface that a type checker can verify. Both kinds of protocols are covered in [Chapter 13](ch13.html#ifaces_prot_abc). This is just a brief introduction in the context of function annotations.

The `Protocol` type, as presented in [PEP 544—Protocols: Structural subtyping (static duck typing)](https://fpy.li/pep544), is similar to interfaces in Go: a protocol type is defined by specifying one or more methods, and the type checker verifies that those methods are implemented where that protocol type is required.

In Python, a protocol definition is written as a `typing.Protocol` subclass. However, classes that _implement_ a protocol don’t need to inherit, register, or declare any relationship with the class that _defines_ the protocol. It’s up to the type checker to find the available protocol types and enforce their usage.

Here is a problem that can be solved with the help of `Protocol` and `TypeVar`. Suppose you want to create a function `top(it, n)` that returns the largest `n` elements of the iterable `it`:

```
>>> 
```

A parameterized generic `top` would look like what’s shown in [Example 8-19](#top_undefined_t_ex).

##### Example 8-19. `top` function with an undefined `T` type parameter

```
def
```

The problem is how to constrain `T`? It cannot be `Any` or `object`, because the `series` must work with `sorted`. The `sorted` built-in actually accepts `Iterable[Any]`, but that’s because the optional parameter `key` takes a function that computes an arbitrary sort key from each element. What happens if you give `sorted` a list of plain objects but don’t provide a `key` argument? Let’s try that:

```
>>> 
```

The error message shows that `sorted` uses the `<` operator on the elements of the iterable. Is this all it takes? Let’s do another quick experiment:[^15]

```
>>> 
```

That confirms it: I can `sort` a list of `Spam` because `Spam` implements `__lt__`—the special method that supports the `<` operator.

So the `T` type parameter in [Example 8-19](#top_undefined_t_ex) should be limited to types that implement `__lt__`. In [Example 8-18](#mode_hashable_ex) we needed a type parameter that implemented `__hash__`, so we were able to use `typing.Hashable` as the upper bound for the type parameter. But now there is no suitable type in `typing` or `abc` to use, so we need to create it.

[Example 8-20](#comparable_protocol_ex) shows the new `SupportsLessThan` type, a `Protocol`.

##### Example 8-20. _comparable.py_: definition of a `SupportsLessThan` `Protocol` type

```
from
```

[![^1]

A protocol is a subclass of `typing.Protocol`.

[![^2]

The body of the protocol has one or more method definitions, with `...` in their bodies.

A type `T` is _consistent-with_ a protocol `P` if `T` implements all the methods defined in `P`, with matching type signatures.

Given `SupportsLessThan`, we can now define this working version of `top` in [Example 8-21](#top_protocol_ex).

##### Example 8-21. _top.py_: definition of the `top` function using a `TypeVar` with `bound=SupportsLessThan`

```
from
```

Let’s test-drive `top`. [Example 8-22](#top_protocol_test) shows part of a test suite for use with `pytest`. It tries calling `top` first with a generator expression that yields `tuple[int, str]`, and then with a list of `object`. With the list of `object`, we expect to get a `TypeError` exception.

##### Example 8-22. _top_test.py_: partial listing of the test suite for `top`

```
from
```

[![^1]

The `typing.TYPE_CHECKING` constant is always `False` at runtime, but type checkers pretend it is `True` when they are type checking.

[![^2]

Explicit type declaration for the `series` variable, to make the Mypy output easier to read.[^16]

[![^3]

This `if` prevents the next three lines from executing when the test runs.

[![^4]

`reveal_type()` cannot be called at runtime, because it is not a regular function but a Mypy debugging facility—that’s why there is no `import` for it. Mypy will output one debugging message for each `reveal_type()` pseudofunction call, showing the inferred type of the argument.

[![^5]

This line will be flagged as an error by Mypy.

The preceding tests pass—but they would pass anyway, with or without type hints in _top.py_. More to the point, if I check that test file with Mypy, I see that the `TypeVar` is working as intended. See the `mypy` command output in [Example 8-23](#top_protocol_mypy_output).

###### Warning

As of Mypy 0.910 (July 2021), the output of `reveal_type` does not show precisely the types I declared in some cases, but compatible types instead. For example, I did not use `typing.Iterator` but used `abc.Iterator`. Please ignore this detail. The Mypy output is still useful. I will pretend this issue of Mypy is fixed when discussing the output.

##### Example 8-23. Output of _mypy top_test.py_ (lines split for readability)

…/comparable/ $ mypy top_test.py
top_test.py:32: note:
    Revealed type is "typing.Iterator[Tuple[builtins.int, builtins.str]]" [![^1]
top_test.py:33: note:
    Revealed type is "builtins.list[Tuple[builtins.int, builtins.str]]"
top_test.py:34: note:
    Revealed type is "builtins.list[Tuple[builtins.int, builtins.str]]" [![^2]
top_test.py:41: note:
    Revealed type is "builtins.list[builtins.object*]" [![^3]
top_test.py:43: error:
    Value of type variable "LT" of "top" cannot be "object"  [![^4]
Found 1 error in 1 file (checked 1 source file)

[![^1]

In `test_top_tuples`, `reveal_type(series)` shows it is an `Iterator[tuple[int, str]]`—which I explicitly declared.

[![^2]

`reveal_type(result)` confirms that the type returned by the `top` call is what I wanted: given the type of `series`, the `result` is `list[tuple[int, str]]`.

[![^3]

In `test_top_objects_error`, `reveal_type(series)` shows it is `list[object*]`. Mypy puts a `*` after any type that was inferred: I did not annotate the type of `series` in this test.

[![^4]

Mypy flags the error that this test intentionally triggers: the element type of the `Iterable` `series` cannot be `object` (it must be of type `SupportsLessThan`).

A key advantage of a protocol type over ABCs is that a type doesn’t need any special declaration to be _consistent-with_ a protocol type. This allows a protocol to be created leveraging preexisting types, or types implemented in code that we do not control. I don’t need to derive or register `str`, `tuple`, `float`, `set`, etc. with `SupportsLessThan` to use them where a `SupportsLessThan` parameter is expected. They only need to implement `__lt__`. And the type checker will still be able do its job, because `SupportsLessThan` is explicitly defined as a `Protocol`—in contrast with the implicit protocols that are common with duck typing, which are invisible to the type checker.

The special `Protocol` class was introduced in [PEP 544—Protocols: Structural subtyping (static duck typing)](https://fpy.li/pep544). [Example 8-21](#top_protocol_ex) demonstrates why this feature is known as _static duck typing_: the solution to annotate the `series` parameter of `top` was to say “The nominal type of `series` doesn’t matter, as long as it implements the `__lt__` method.” Python’s duck typing always allowed us to say that implicitly, leaving static type checkers clueless. A type checker can’t read CPython’s source code in C, or perform console experiments to find out that `sorted` only requires that the elements support `<`.

Now we can make duck typing explicit for static type checkers. That’s why it makes sense to say that `typing.Protocol` gives us _static duck typing_.[^17]

There’s more to see about `typing.Protocol`. We’ll come back to it in Part IV, where [Chapter 13](ch13.html#ifaces_prot_abc) contrasts structural typing, duck typing, and ABCs—another approach to formalizing protocols. In addition, [“Overloaded Signatures”](ch15.html#overload_sec) ([Chapter 15](ch15.html#more_types_ch)) explains how to declare overloaded function signatures with `@typing.overload`, and includes an extensive example using `typing.Protocol` and a bounded `TypeVar`.

###### Note

`typing.Protocol` makes it possible to annotate the `double` function presented in [“Types Are Defined by Supported Operations”](#types_defined_by_ops_sec) without losing functionality. The key is to define a protocol class with the `__mul__` method. I invite you to do that as an exercise. The solution appears in [“The Typed double Function”](ch13.html#typed_double_sec) ([Chapter 13](ch13.html#ifaces_prot_abc)).