## Properties Override Instance Attributes

Properties are always class attributes, but they actually manage attribute access in the instances of the class.

In [“Overriding Class Attributes”](ch11.html#overriding_class_attributes) we saw that when an instance and its class both have a data attribute by the same name, the instance attribute overrides, or shadows, the class attribute—at least when read through that instance. [Example 22-23](#attr_override_demo1) illustrates this point.

##### Example 22-23. Instance attribute shadows the class `data` attribute

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Define `Class` with two class attributes: the `data` attribute and the `prop` property.

[![^2]

`vars` returns the `__dict__` of `obj`, showing it has no instance attributes.

[![^3]

Reading from `obj.data` retrieves the value of `Class.data`.

[![^4]

Writing to `obj.data` creates an instance attribute.

[![^5]

Inspect the instance to see the instance attribute.

[![^6]

Now reading from `obj.data` retrieves the value of the instance attribute. When read from the `obj` instance, the instance `data` shadows the class `data`.

[![^7]

The `Class.data` attribute is intact.

Now, let’s try to override the `prop` attribute on the `obj` instance. Resuming the previous console session, we have [Example 22-24](#attr_override_demo2).

##### Example 22-24. Instance attribute does not shadow the class property (continued from [Example 22-23](#attr_override_demo1))

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Reading `prop` directly from `Class` retrieves the property object itself, without running its getter method.

[![^2]

Reading `obj.prop` executes the property getter.

[![^3]

Trying to set an instance `prop` attribute fails.

[![^4]

Putting `'prop'` directly in the `obj.__dict__` works.

[![^5]

We can see that `obj` now has two instance attributes: `data` and `prop`.

[![^6]

However, reading `obj.prop` still runs the property getter. The property is not shadowed by an instance attribute.

[![^7]

Overwriting `Class.prop` destroys the property object.

[![^8]

Now `obj.prop` retrieves the instance attribute. `Class.prop` is not a property anymore, so it no longer overrides `obj.prop`.

As a final demonstration, we’ll add a new property to `Class`, and see it overriding an instance attribute. [Example 22-25](#attr_override_demo3) picks up where [Example 22-24](#attr_override_demo2) left off.

##### Example 22-25. New class property shadows the existing instance attribute (continued from [Example 22-24](#attr_override_demo2))

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`obj.data` retrieves the instance `data` attribute.

[![^2]

`Class.data` retrieves the class `data` attribute.

[![^3]

Overwrite `Class.data` with a new property.

[![^4]

`obj.data` is now shadowed by the `Class.data` property.

[![^5]

Delete the property.

[![^6]

`obj.data` now reads the instance `data` attribute again.

The main point of this section is that an expression like `obj.data` does not start the search for `data` in `obj`. The search actually starts at `obj.__class__`, and only if there is no property named `data` in the class, Python looks in the `obj` instance itself. This applies to _overriding descriptors_ in general, of which properties are just one example. Further treatment of descriptors must wait for [Chapter 23](ch23.html#attribute_descriptors).

Now back to properties. Every Python code unit—modules, functions, classes, methods—can have a docstring. The next topic is how to attach documentation to properties.