## Monkey Patching: Implementing a Protocol at Runtime

Monkey patching is dynamically changing a module, class, or function at runtime, to add features or fix bugs. For example, the gevent networking library monkey patches parts of Python’s standard library to allow lightweight concurrency without threads or `async`/`await`.[^2]

The `FrenchDeck` class from [Example 13-2](#ex_pythonic_deck_repeat) is missing an essential feature: it cannot be shuffled. Years ago when I first wrote the `FrenchDeck` example, I did implement a `shuffle` method. Later I had a Pythonic insight: if a `FrenchDeck` acts like a sequence, then it doesn’t need its own `shuffle` method because there is already `random.shuffle`, [documented](https://fpy.li/13-6) as “Shuffle the sequence _x_ in place.”

The standard `random.shuffle` function is used like this:

```
>>> 
```

###### Tip

When you follow established protocols, you improve your chances of leveraging existing standard library and third-party code, thanks to duck typing.

However, if we try to shuffle a `FrenchDeck` instance, we get an exception, as in [Example 13-3](#ex_unshuffable).

##### Example 13-3. `random.shuffle` cannot handle `FrenchDeck`

```
>>> 
```

The error message is clear: `'FrenchDeck' object does not support item assignment`. The problem is that `shuffle` operates _in place_, by swapping items inside the collection, and `FrenchDeck` only implements the _immutable_ sequence protocol. Mutable sequences must also provide a `__setitem__` method.

Because Python is dynamic, we can fix this at runtime, even at the interactive console. [Example 13-4](#ex_monkey_patch) shows how to do it.

##### Example 13-4. Monkey patching `FrenchDeck` to make it mutable and compatible with `random.shuffle` (continuing from [Example 13-3](#ex_unshuffable))

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Create a function that takes `deck`, `position`, and `card` as arguments.

[![^2]

Assign that function to an attribute named `__setitem__` in the `FrenchDeck` class.

[![^3]

`deck` can now be shuffled because I added the necessary method of the mutable sequence protocol.

The signature of the `__setitem__` special method is defined in _The Python Language Reference_ in [“3.3.6. Emulating container types”](https://fpy.li/13-7). Here I named the arguments `deck, position, card`—and not `self, key, value` as in the language reference—to show that every Python method starts life as a plain function, and naming the first argument `self` is merely a convention. This is OK in a console session, but in a Python source file it’s much better to use `self`, `key`, and `value` as documented.

The trick is that `set_card` knows that the `deck` object has an attribute named `_cards`, and `_cards` must be a mutable sequence. The `set_card` function is then attached to the `FrenchDeck` class as the `__setitem__` special method. This is an example of _monkey patching_: changing a class or module at runtime, without touching the source code. Monkey patching is powerful, but the code that does the actual patching is very tightly coupled with the program to be patched, often handling private and undocumented attributes.

Besides being an example of monkey patching, [Example 13-4](#ex_monkey_patch) highlights the dynamic nature of protocols in dynamic duck typing: `random.shuffle` doesn’t care about the class of the argument, it only needs the object to implement methods from the mutable sequence protocol. It doesn’t even matter if the object was “born” with the necessary methods or if they were somehow acquired later.

Duck typing doesn’t need to be wildly unsafe or hard to debug. The next section shows some useful code patterns to detect dynamic protocols without resorting to explicit checks.