## Single Dispatch Generic Functions

Imagine we are creating a tool to debug web applications. We want to generate HTML displays for different types of Python objects.

We could start with a function like this:

```
import
```

That will work for any Python type, but now we want to extend it to generate custom displays for some types. Some examples:

`str`

Replace embedded newline characters with `'<br/>\n'` and use `<p>` tags instead of `<pre>`.

`int`

Show the number in decimal and hexadecimal (with a special case for `bool`).

`list`

Output an HTML list, formatting each item according to its type.

`float` and `Decimal`

Output the value as usual, but also in the form of a fraction (why not?).

The behavior we want is shown in [Example 9-19](#singledispatch_demo).

##### Example 9-19. `htmlize()` generates HTML tailored to different object types

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

The original function is registered for `object`, so it serves as a catch-all to handle argument types that don’t match the other implementations.

[![^2]

`str` objects are also HTML-escaped but wrapped in `<p></p>`, with `<br/>` line breaks inserted before each `'\n'`.

[![^3]

An `int` is shown in decimal and hexadecimal, inside `<pre></pre>`.

[![^4]

Each list item is formatted according to its type, and the whole sequence is rendered as an HTML list.

[![^5]

Although `bool` is an `int` subtype, it gets special treatment.

[![^6]

Show `Fraction` as a fraction.

[![^7]

Show `float` and `Decimal` with an approximate fractional equivalent.