### Function singledispatch

Because we don’t have Java-style method overloading in Python, we can’t simply create variations of `htmlize` with different signatures for each data type we want to handle differently. A possible solution in Python would be to turn `htmlize` into a dispatch function, with a chain of `if/elif/…` or `match/case/…` calling specialized functions like `htmlize_str`, `htmlize_int`, etc. This is not extensible by users of our module, and is unwieldy: over time, the `htmlize` dispatcher would become too big, and the coupling between it and the specialized functions would be very tight.

The `functools.singledispatch` decorator allows different modules to contribute to the overall solution, and lets you easily provide specialized functions even for types that belong to third-party packages that you can’t edit. If you decorate a plain function with `@singledispatch`, it becomes the entry point for a _generic function_: a group of functions to perform the same operation in different ways, depending on the type of the first argument. This is what is meant by the term _single dispatch_. If more arguments were used to select the specific functions, we’d have _multiple dispatch_. [Example 9-20](#singledispatch_ex) shows how.

###### Warning

`functools.singledispatch` exists since Python 3.4, but it only supports type hints since Python 3.7. The last two functions in [Example 9-20](#singledispatch_ex) illustrate the syntax that works in all versions of Python since 3.4.

##### Example 9-20. `@singledispatch` creates a custom `@htmlize.register` to bundle several functions into a generic function

```
from
```

[![^1]

`@singledispatch` marks the base function that handles the `object` type.

[![^2]

Each specialized function is decorated with `@«base».register`.

[![^3]

The type of the first argument given at runtime determines when this particular function definition will be used. The name of the specialized functions is irrelevant; `_` is a good choice to make this clear.[^6]

[![^4]

For each additional type to get special treatment, register a new function with a matching type hint in the first parameter.

[![^5]

The `numbers` ABCs are useful for use with `singledispatch`.[^7]

[![^6]

`bool` is a _subtype-of_ `numbers.Integral`, but the `singledispatch` logic seeks the implementation with the most specific matching type, regardless of the order they appear in the code.

[![^7]

If you don’t want to, or cannot, add type hints to the decorated function, you can pass a type to the `@«base».register` decorator. This syntax works in Python 3.4 or later.

[![^8]

The `@«base».register` decorator returns the undecorated function, so it’s possible to stack them to register two or more types on the same implementation.[^8]

When possible, register the specialized functions to handle ABCs (abstract classes) such as `numbers.Integral` and `abc.MutableSequence`, instead of concrete implementations like `int` and `list`. This allows your code to support a greater variety of compatible types. For example, a Python extension can provide alternatives to the `int` type with fixed bit lengths as subclasses of `numbers.Integral`.[^9]

###### Tip

Using ABCs or `typing.Protocol` with `@singledispatch` allows your code to support existing or future classes that are actual or virtual subclasses of those ABCs, or that implement those protocols. The use of ABCs and the concept of a virtual subclass are subjects of [Chapter 13](ch13.html#ifaces_prot_abc).

A notable quality of the `singledispatch` mechanism is that you can register specialized functions anywhere in the system, in any module. If you later add a module with a new user-defined type, you can easily provide a new custom function to handle that type. And you can write custom functions for classes that you did not write and can’t change.

`singledispatch` is a well-thought-out addition to the standard library, and it offers more features than I can describe here. [PEP 443—Single-dispatch generic functions](https://fpy.li/pep443) is a good reference, but it doesn’t mention the use of type hints, which were added later. The `functools` module documentation has improved and has more up-to-date coverage with several examples in its [`singledispatch`](https://fpy.li/9-4) entry.

###### Note

`@singledispatch` is not designed to bring Java-style method overloading to Python. A single class with many overloaded variations of a method is better than a single function with a lengthy stretch of `if/elif/elif/elif` blocks. But both solutions are flawed because they concentrate too much responsibility in a single code unit—the class or the function. The advantage of `@singledispatch` is supporting modular extension: each module can register a specialized function for each type it supports. In a realistic use case, you would not have all the implementations of generic functions in the same module as in [Example 9-20](#singledispatch_ex).

We’ve seen some decorators that take arguments, for example, `@lru_cache()` and `htmlize.register(float)`, created by `@singledispatch` in [Example 9-20](#singledispatch_ex). The next section shows how to build decorators that accept parameters.