# Data Class as a Code Smell

Whether you implement a data class by writing all the code yourself or leveraging one of the class builders described in this chapter, be aware that it may signal a problem in your design.

In [_Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code_, 2nd ed.](https://martinfowler.com/books/refactoring.html) (Addison-Wesley), Martin Fowler and Kent Beck present a catalog of “code smells”—patterns in code that may indicate the need for refactoring. The entry titled “Data Class” starts like this:

> These are classes that have fields, getting and setting methods for fields, and nothing else. Such classes are dumb data holders and are often being manipulated in far too much detail by other classes.

In Fowler’s personal website, there’s an illuminating post titled [“Code Smell”](https://fpy.li/5-14). The post is very relevant to our discussion because he uses _data class_ as one example of a code smell and suggests how to deal with it. Here is the post, reproduced in full.[^9]

##### Code Smell

**By Martin Fowler**

A code smell is a surface indication that usually corresponds to a deeper problem in the system. The term was first coined by Kent Beck while helping me with my [_Refactoring_ book](https://fpy.li/5-15).

The quick definition above contains a couple of subtle points. Firstly, a smell is by definition something that’s quick to spot—or sniffable as I’ve recently put it. A long method is a good example of this—just looking at the code and my nose twitches if I see more than a dozen lines of Java.

The second is that smells don’t always indicate a problem. Some long methods are just fine. You have to look deeper to see if there is an underlying problem there—smells aren’t inherently bad on their own—they are often an indicator of a problem rather than the problem themselves.

The best smells are something that’s easy to spot and most of the time lead you to really interesting problems. Data classes (classes with all data and no behavior) are good examples of this. You look at them and ask yourself what behavior should be in this class. Then you start refactoring to move that behavior in there. Often simple questions and initial refactorings can be the vital step in turning anemic objects into something that really has class.

One of the nice things about smells is that it’s easy for inexperienced people to spot them, even if they don’t know enough to evaluate if there’s a real problem or to correct them. I’ve heard of lead developers who will pick a “smell of the week” and ask people to look for the smell and bring it up with the senior members of the team. Doing it one smell at a time is a good way of gradually teaching people on the team to be better programmers.

The main idea of object-oriented programming is to place behavior and data together in the same code unit: a class. If a class is widely used but has no significant behavior of its own, it’s possible that code dealing with its instances is scattered (and even duplicated) in methods and functions throughout the system—a recipe for maintenance headaches. That’s why Fowler’s refactorings to deal with a data class involve bringing responsibilities back into it.

Taking that into account, there are a couple of common scenarios where it makes sense to have a data class with little or no behavior.