# Set Theory

Sets are not new in Python, but are still somewhat underused. The `set` type and its immutable sibling `frozenset` first appeared as modules in the Python 2.3 standard library, and were promoted to built-ins in Python 2.6.

###### Note

In this book, I use the word “set” to refer both to `set` and `frozenset`. When talking specifically about the `set` class, I use constant width font: `set`.

A set is a collection of unique objects. A basic use case is removing duplication:

```
>>> 
```

###### Tip

If you want to remove duplicates but also preserve the order of the first occurrence of each item, you can now use a plain `dict` to do it, like this:

```
>>> 
```

Set elements must be hashable. The `set` type is not hashable, so you can’t build a `set` with nested `set` instances. But `frozenset` is hashable, so you can have `frozenset` elements inside a `set`.

In addition to enforcing uniqueness, the set types implement many set operations as infix operators, so, given two sets `a` and `b`, `a | b` returns their union, `a & b` computes the intersection, `a - b` the difference, and `a ^ b` the symmetric difference. Smart use of set operations can reduce both the line count and the execution time of Python programs, at the same time making code easier to read and reason about—by removing loops and conditional logic.

For example, imagine you have a large set of email addresses (the `haystack`) and a smaller set of addresses (the `needles`) and you need to count how many `needles` occur in the `haystack`. Thanks to `set` intersection (the `&` operator) you can code that in a simple line (see [Example 3-12](#ex_set_ops_ex)).

##### Example 3-12. Count occurrences of needles in a haystack, both of type set

```
found
```

Without the intersection operator, you’d have to write [Example 3-13](#ex_set_loop_ex) to accomplish the same task as [Example 3-12](#ex_set_ops_ex).

##### Example 3-13. Count occurrences of needles in a haystack (same end result as [Example 3-12](#ex_set_ops_ex))

```
found
```

[Example 3-12](#ex_set_ops_ex) runs slightly faster than [Example 3-13](#ex_set_loop_ex). On the other hand, [Example 3-13](#ex_set_loop_ex) works for any iterable objects `needles` and `haystack`, while [Example 3-12](#ex_set_ops_ex) requires that both be sets. But, if you don’t have sets on hand, you can always build them on the fly, as shown in [Example 3-14](#ex_set_ops_ex2).

##### Example 3-14. Count occurrences of needles in a haystack; these lines work for any iterable types

```
found
```

Of course, there is an extra cost involved in building the sets in [Example 3-14](#ex_set_ops_ex2), but if either the `needles` or the `haystack` is already a set, the alternatives in [Example 3-14](#ex_set_ops_ex2) may be cheaper than [Example 3-13](#ex_set_loop_ex).

Any one of the preceding examples are capable of searching 1,000 elements in a `haystack` of 10,000,000 items in about 0.3 milliseconds—that’s close to 0.3 microseconds per element.

Besides the extremely fast membership test (thanks to the underlying hash table), the `set` and `frozenset` built-in types provide a rich API to create new sets or, in the case of `set`, to change existing ones. We will discuss the operations shortly, but first a note about syntax.