# Types Are Defined by Supported Operations

> There are many definitions of the concept of type in the literature. Here we assume that type is a set of values and a set of functions that one can apply to these values.
> 
> PEP 483—The Theory of Type Hints

In practice, it’s more useful to consider the set of supported operations as the defining characteristic of a type.[^4]

For example, from the point of view of applicable operations, what are the valid types for `x` in the following function?

```
def
```

The `x` parameter type may be numeric (`int`, `complex`, `Fraction`, `numpy.uint32`, etc.) but it may also be a sequence (`str`, `tuple`, `list`, `array`), an N-dimensional `numpy.array`, or any other type that implements or inherits a `__mul__` method that accepts an `int` argument.

However, consider this annotated `double`. Please ignore the missing return type for now, let’s focus on the parameter type:

```
from
```

A type checker will reject that code. If you tell Mypy that `x` is of type `abc.Sequence`, it will flag `x * 2` as an error because the [`Sequence` ABC](https://fpy.li/8-13) does not implement or inherit the `__mul__` method. At runtime, that code will work with concrete sequences such as `str`, `tuple`, `list`, `array`, etc., as well as numbers, because at runtime the type hints are ignored. But the type checker only cares about what is explicitly declared, and `abc.Sequence` has no `__mul__`.

That’s why the title of this section is “Types Are Defined by Supported Operations.” The Python runtime accepts any object as the `x` argument for both versions of the `double` function. The computation `x * 2` may work, or it may raise `TypeError` if the operation is not supported by `x`. In contrast, Mypy will declare `x * 2` as wrong while analyzing the annotated `double` source code, because it’s an unsupported operation for the declared type: `x: abc.Sequence`.

In a gradual type system, we have the interplay of two different views of types:

Duck typing

The view adopted by Smalltalk—the pioneering object-oriented language—as well as Python, JavaScript, and Ruby. Objects have types, but variables (including parameters) are untyped. In practice, it doesn’t matter what the declared type of the object is, only what operations it actually supports. If I can invoke `birdie.quack()`, then `birdie` is a duck in this context. By definition, duck typing is only enforced at runtime, when operations on objects are attempted. This is more flexible than _nominal typing_, at the cost of allowing more errors at runtime.[^5]

Nominal typing

The view adopted by C++, Java, and C#, supported by annotated Python. Objects and variables have types. But objects only exist at runtime, and the type checker only cares about the source code where variables (including parameters) are annotated with type hints. If `Duck` is a subclass of `Bird`, you can assign a `Duck` instance to a parameter annotated as `birdie: Bird`. But in the body of the function, the type checker considers the call `birdie.quack()` illegal, because `birdie` is nominally a `Bird`, and that class does not provide the `.quack()` method. It doesn’t matter if the actual argument at runtime is a `Duck`, because nominal typing is enforced statically. The type checker doesn’t run any part of the program, it only reads the source code. This is more rigid than _duck typing_, with the advantage of catching some bugs earlier in a build pipeline, or even as the code is typed in an IDE.

[Example 8-4](#birds_module_ex) is a silly example that contrasts duck typing and nominal typing, as well as static type checking and runtime behavior.[^6]

##### Example 8-4. _birds.py_

```
class
```

[![^1]

`Duck` is a subclass of `Bird`.

[![^2]

`alert` has no type hints, so the type checker ignores it.

[![^3]

`alert_duck` takes one argument of type `Duck`.

[![^4]

`alert_bird` takes one argument of type `Bird`.

Type checking _birds.py_ with Mypy, we see a problem:

…/birds/ $ mypy birds.py
birds.py:16: error: "Bird" has no attribute "quack"
Found 1 error in 1 file (checked 1 source file)

Just by analyzing the source code, Mypy sees that `alert_bird` is problematic: the type hint declares the `birdie` parameter with type `Bird`, but the body of the function calls `birdie.quack()`—and the `Bird` class has no such method.

Now let’s try to use the `birds` module in _daffy.py_ in [Example 8-5](#daffy_module_ex).

##### Example 8-5. _daffy.py_

```
from
```

[![^1]

Valid call, because `alert` has no type hints.

[![^2]

Valid call, because `alert_duck` takes a `Duck` argument, and `daffy` is a `Duck`.

[![^3]

Valid call, because `alert_bird` takes a `Bird` argument, and `daffy` is also a `Bird`—the superclass of `Duck`.

Running Mypy on _daffy.py_ raises the same error about the `quack` call in the `alert_bird` function defined in _birds.py_:

…/birds/ $ mypy daffy.py
birds.py:16: error: "Bird" has no attribute "quack"
Found 1 error in 1 file (checked 1 source file)

But Mypy sees no problem with _daffy.py_ itself: the three function calls are OK.

Now, if you run _daffy.py_, this is what you get:

…/birds/ $ python3 daffy.py
Quack!
Quack!
Quack!

Everything works! Duck typing FTW!

At runtime, Python doesn’t care about declared types. It uses duck typing only. Mypy flagged an error in `alert_bird`, but calling it with `daffy` works fine at runtime. This may surprise many Pythonistas at first: a static type checker will sometimes find errors in programs that we know will execute.

However, if months from now you are tasked with extending the silly bird example, you may be grateful for Mypy. Consider this _woody.py_ module, which also uses `birds`, in [Example 8-6](#woody_module_ex).

##### Example 8-6. _woody.py_

```
from
```

Mypy finds two errors while checking _woody.py_:

…/birds/ $ mypy woody.py
birds.py:16: error: "Bird" has no attribute "quack"
woody.py:5: error: Argument 1 to "alert_duck" has incompatible type "Bird";
expected "Duck"
Found 2 errors in 2 files (checked 1 source file)

The first error is in _birds.py_: the `birdie.quack()` call in `alert_bird`, which we’ve seen before. The second error is in _woody.py_: `woody` is an instance of `Bird`, so the call `alert_duck(woody)` is invalid because that function requires a `Duck`. Every `Duck` is a `Bird`, but not every `Bird` is a `Duck`.

At runtime, none of the calls in _woody.py_ succeed. The succession of failures is best illustrated in a console session with callouts in [Example 8-7](#birdie_errors_ex).

##### Example 8-7. Runtime errors and how Mypy could have helped

```
>>
```

[![^1]

Mypy could not detect this error because there are no type hints in `alert`.

[![^2]

Mypy reported the problem: `Argument 1 to "alert_duck" has incompatible type "Bird"; expected "Duck"`.

[![^3]

Mypy has been telling us since [Example 8-4](#birds_module_ex) that the body of the `alert_bird` function is wrong: `"Bird" has no attribute "quack"`.

This little experiment shows that duck typing is easier to get started and is more flexible, but allows unsupported operations to cause errors at runtime. Nominal typing detects errors before runtime, but sometimes can reject code that actually runs—such as the call `alert_bird(daffy)` in [Example 8-5](#daffy_module_ex). Even if it sometimes works, the `alert_bird` function is misnamed: its body does require an object that supports the `.quack()` method, which `Bird` doesn’t have.

In this silly example, the functions are one-liners. But in real code they could be longer; they could pass the `birdie` argument to more functions, and the origin of the `birdie` argument could be many function calls away, making it hard to pinpoint the cause of a runtime error. The type checker prevents many such errors from ever happening at runtime.

###### Note

The value of type hints is questionable in the tiny examples that fit in a book. The benefits grow with the size of the codebase. That’s why companies with millions of lines of Python code—like Dropbox, Google, and Facebook—invested in teams and tools to support the company-wide adoption of type hints, and have significant and increasing portions of their Python codebases type checked in their CI pipelines.

In this section we explored the relationship of types and operations in duck typing and nominal typing, starting with the simple `double()` function—which we left without proper type hints. Now we will tour the most important types used for annotating functions. We’ll see a good way to add type hints to `double()` when we reach [“Static Protocols”](#protocols_in_fn). But before we get to that, there are more fundamental types to know.