## Multicore Prime Checker Redux

In [“Code for the Multicore Prime Checker”](ch19.html#code_for_multicore_prime_sec) we studied _procs.py_, a script that checked the primality of some large numbers using `multiprocessing`. In [Example 20-6](#proc_pool_py) we solve the same problem in the _proc_pool.py_ program using a `ProcessPool​Executor`. From the first import to the `main()` call at the end, _procs.py_ has 43 nonblank lines of code, and _proc_pool.py_ has 31—28% shorter.

##### Example 20-6. proc_pool.py: _procs.py_ rewritten with `ProcessPoolExecutor`

```
import
```

[![^1]

No need to import `multiprocessing`, `SimpleQueue` etc.; `concurrent.futures` hides all that.

[![^2]

The `PrimeResult` tuple and the `check` function are the same as we saw in _procs.py_, but we don’t need the queues and the `worker` function anymore.

[![^3]

Instead of deciding ourselves how many workers to use if no command-line argument was given, we set `workers` to `None` and let the `ProcessPoolExecutor` decide.

[![^4]

Here I build the `ProcessPoolExecutor` before the `with` block in ➐ so that I can display the actual number of workers in the next line.

[![^5]

`_max_workers` is an undocumented instance attribute of a `ProcessPoolExecutor`. I decided to use it to show the number of workers when the `workers` variable is `None`. _Mypy_ correctly complains when I access it, so I put the `type: ignore` comment to silence it.

[![^6]

Sort the numbers to be checked in descending order. This will expose a difference in the behavior of _proc_pool.py_ when compared with _procs.py_. See the explanation after this example.

[![^7]

Use the `executor` as a context manager.

[![^8]

The `executor.map` call returns the `PrimeResult` instances returned by `check` in the same order as the `numbers` arguments.

If you run [Example 20-6](#proc_pool_py), you’ll see the results appearing in strict descending order, as shown in [Example 20-7](#proc_pool_py_output). In contrast, the ordering of the output of _procs.py_ (shown in [“Process-Based Solution”](ch19.html#proc_based_solution)) is heavily influenced by the difficulty in checking whether each number is a prime. For example, _procs.py_ shows the result for 7777777777777777 near the top, because it has a low divisor, 7, so `is_prime` quickly determines it’s not a prime.

In contrast, 7777777536340681 is 881917092, so `is_prime` will take much longer to determine that it’s a composite number, and even longer to find out that 7777777777777753 is prime—therefore both of these numbers appear near the end of the output of _procs.py_.

Running _proc_pool.py_, you’ll observe not only the descending order of the results, but also that the program will appear to be stuck after showing the result for 9999999999999999.

##### Example 20-7. Output of proc_pool.py

```
$ ./proc_pool.py
Checking 20 numbers with 12 processes:
9999999999999999     0.000024s  
```

[![^1]

This line appears very quickly.

[![^2]

This line takes more than 9.5s to show up.

[![^3]

All the remaining lines appear almost immediately.

Here is why _proc_pool.py_ behaves in that way:

- As mentioned before, `executor.map(check, numbers)` returns the result in the same order as the `numbers` are given.
    
- By default, _proc_pool.py_ uses as many workers as there are CPUs—it’s what `ProcessPoolExecutor` does when `max_workers` is `None`. That’s 12 processes in this laptop.
    
- Because we are submitting `numbers` in descending order, the first is 9999999999999999; with 9 as a divisor, it returns quickly.
    
- The second number is 9999999999999917, the largest prime in the sample. This will take longer than all the others to check.
    
- Meanwhile, the remaining 11 processes will be checking other numbers, which are either primes or composites with large factors, or composites with very small factors.
    
- When the worker in charge of 9999999999999917 finally determines that’s a prime, all the other processes have completed their last jobs, so the results appear immediately after.
    

###### Note

Although the progress of _proc_pool.py_ is not as visible as that of _procs.py_, the overall execution time is practically the same as depicted in [Figure 19-2](ch19.html#procs_x_time_fig), for the same number of workers and CPU cores.

Understanding how concurrent programs behave is not straightforward, so here’s is a second experiment that may help you visualize the operation of `Executor.map`.