# Chapter Summary

After a bit of theory, this chapter presented the spinner scripts implemented in each of Python’s three native concurrency programming models:

- Threads, with the `threading` package
    
- Processes, with `multiprocessing`
    
- Asynchronous coroutines with `asyncio`
    

We then explored the real impact of the GIL with an experiment: changing the spinner examples to compute the primality of a large integer and observe the resulting behavior. This demonstrated graphically that CPU-intensive functions must be avoided in `asyncio`, as they block the event loop. The threaded version of the experiment worked—despite the GIL—because Python periodically interrupts threads, and the example used only two threads: one doing compute-intensive work, and the other driving the animation only 10 times per second. The `multiprocessing` variant worked around the GIL, starting a new process just for the animation, while the main process did the primality check.

The next example, computing several primes, highlighted the difference between `multiprocessing` and `threading`, proving that only processes allow Python to benefit from multicore CPUs. Python’s GIL makes threads worse than sequential code for heavy computations.

The GIL dominates discussions about concurrent and parallel computing in Python, but we should not overestimate its impact. That was the point of [“Python in the Multicore World”](#py_in_multicore_world_sec). For example, the GIL doesn’t affect many use cases of Python in system administration. On the other hand, the data science and server-side development communities have worked around the GIL with industrial-strength solutions tailored to their specific needs. The last two sections mentioned two common elements to support Python server-side applications at scale: WSGI application servers and distributed task queues.