# Introducing __init_subclass__

Both `__init_subclass__` and `__set_name__` were proposed in [PEP 487—Simpler customization of class creation](https://fpy.li/pep487). We saw the `__set_name__` special method for descriptors for the first time in [“LineItem Take #4: Automatic Naming of Storage Attributes”](ch23.html#auto_storage_sec). Now let’s study `__init_subclass__`.

In [Chapter 5](ch05.html#data_class_ch), we saw that `typing.NamedTuple` and `@dataclass` let programmers use the `class` statement to specify attributes for a new class, which is then enhanced by the class builder with the automatic addition of essential methods like `__init__`, `__repr__`, `__eq__`, etc.

Both of these class builders read type hints in the user’s `class` statement to enhance the class. Those type hints also allow static type checkers to validate code that sets or gets those attributes. However, `NamedTuple` and `@dataclass` do not take advantage of the type hints for attribute validation at runtime. The `Checked` class in the next example does.

###### Note

It is not possible to support every conceivable static type hint for runtime type checking, which is probably why `typing.NamedTuple` and `@dataclass` don’t even try it. However, some types that are also concrete classes can be used with `Checked`. This includes simple types often used for field contents, such as `str`, `int`, `float`, and `bool`, as well as lists of those types.

[Example 24-3](#checked_demo1_ex) shows how to use `Checked` to build a `Movie` class.

##### Example 24-3. initsub/checkedlib.py: doctest for creating a `Movie` subclass of `Checked`

```
    
```

[![^1]

`Movie` inherits from `Checked`—which we’ll define later in [Example 24-5](#checked_class_top_ex).

[![^2]

Each attribute is annotated with a constructor. Here I used built-in types.

[![^3]

`Movie` instances must be created using keyword arguments.

[![^4]

In return, you get a nice `__repr__`.

The constructors used as the attribute type hints may be any callable that takes zero or one argument and returns a value suitable for the intended field type, or rejects the argument by raising `TypeError` or `ValueError`.

Using built-in types for the annotations in [Example 24-3](#checked_demo1_ex) means the values must be acceptable by the constructor of the type. For `int`, this means any `x` such that `int(x)` returns an `int`. For `str`, anything goes at runtime, because `str(x)` works with any `x` in Python.[^5]

When called with no arguments, the constructor should return a default value of its type.[^6]

This is standard behavior for Python’s built-in constructors:

```
>>>
```

In a `Checked` subclass like `Movie`, missing parameters create instances with default values returned by the field constructors. For example:

    `>>>` `Movie``(``title``=``'Life of Brian'``)`
    `Movie``(``title``=``'Life of Brian'``,` `year``=``0``,` `box_office``=``0.0``)`

The constructors are used for validation during instantiation and when an attribute is set directly on an instance:

    `>>>` `blockbuster` `=` `Movie``(``title``=``'Avatar'``,` `year``=``2009``,` `box_office``=``'billions'``)`
    `Traceback` `(``most` `recent` `call` `last``):`
      `...`
    `TypeError``:` `'billions'` `is` `not` `compatible` `with` `box_office``:``float`
    `>>>` `movie``.``year` `=` `'MCMLXXII'`
    `Traceback` `(``most` `recent` `call` `last``):`
      `...`
    `TypeError``:` `'MCMLXXII'` `is` `not` `compatible` `with` `year``:``int`

# Checked Subclasses and Static Type Checking

In a _.py_ source file with a `movie` instance of `Movie`, as defined in [Example 24-3](#checked_demo1_ex), Mypy flags this assignment as a type error:

```
movie
```

However, Mypy can’t detect type errors in this constructor call:

```
blockbuster
```

That’s because `Movie` inherits `Checked.__init__`, and the signature of that method must accept any keyword arguments to support arbitrary user-defined classes.

On the other hand, if you declare a `Checked` subclass field with the type hint `list[float]`, Mypy can flag assignments of lists with incompatible contents, but `Checked` will ignore the type parameter and treat that the same as `list`.

Now let’s look at the implementation of _checkedlib.py_. The first class is the `Field` descriptor, as shown in [Example 24-4](#checked_field_ex).

##### Example 24-4. initsub/checkedlib.py: the `Field` descriptor class

```
from
```

[![^1]

Recall that since Python 3.9, the `Callable` type for annotations is the ABC in `collections.abc`, and not the deprecated `typing.Callable`.

[![^2]

This is a minimal `Callable` type hint; the parameter type and return type for `constructor` are both implicitly `Any`.

[![^3]

For runtime checking, we use the `callable` built-in.[^7], but a useless constructor that only returns `None`.

[![^4]

If `Checked.__init__` sets the `value` as `...` (the `Ellipsis` built-in object), we call the `constructor` with no arguments.

[![^5]

Otherwise, call the `constructor` with the given `value`.

[![^6]

If `constructor` raises either of these exceptions, we raise `TypeError` with a helpful message including the names of the field and constructor; e.g., `'MMIX' is not compatible with year:int`.

[![^7]

If no exceptions were raised, the `value` is stored in the `instance.__dict__`.

In `__set__`, we need to catch `TypeError` and `ValueError` because built-in constructors may raise either of them, depending on the argument. For example, `float(None)` raises `TypeError`, but `float('A')` raises `ValueError`. On the other hand, `float('8')` raises no error and returns `8.0`. I hereby declare that this is a feature and not a bug of this toy example.

###### Tip

In [“LineItem Take #4: Automatic Naming of Storage Attributes”](ch23.html#auto_storage_sec), we saw the handy `__set_name__` special method for descriptors. We don’t need it in the `Field` class because the descriptors are not instantiated in client source code; the user declares types that are constructors, as we saw in the `Movie` class ([Example 24-3](#checked_demo1_ex)). Instead, the `Field` descriptor instances are created at runtime by the `Checked.__init_subclass__` method, which we’ll see in [Example 24-5](#checked_class_top_ex).

Now let’s focus on the `Checked` class. I split it in two listings. [Example 24-5](#checked_class_top_ex) shows the top of the class, which includes the most important methods in this example. The remaining methods are in [Example 24-6](#checked_class_bottom_ex).

##### Example 24-5. initsub/checkedlib.py: the most important methods of the `Checked` class

```
class
```

[![^1]

I wrote this class method to hide the call to `typing.get_type_hints` from the rest of the class. If I need to support Python ≥ 3.10 only, I’d call `inspect.get_annotations` instead. Review [“Problems with Annotations at Runtime”](ch15.html#problems_annot_runtime_sec) for the issues with those functions.

[![^2]

`__init_subclass__` is called when a subclass of the current class is defined. It gets that new subclass as its first argument—which is why I named the argument `subclass` instead of the usual `cls`. For more on this, see [“__init_subclass__ Is Not a Typical Class Method”](#init_subclass_not_typical_box).

[![^3]

`super().__init_subclass__()` is not strictly necessary, but should be invoked to play nice with other classes that might implement `.__init_subclass__()` in the same inheritance graph. See [“Multiple Inheritance and Method Resolution Order”](ch14.html#mro_section).

[![^4]

Iterate over each field `name` and `constructor`…

[![^5]

…creating an attribute on `subclass` with that `name` bound to a `Field` descriptor parameterized with `name` and `constructor`.

[![^6]

For each `name` in the class fields…

[![^7]

…get the corresponding `value` from `kwargs` and remove it from `kwargs`. Using `...` (the `Ellipsis` object) as default allows us to distinguish between arguments given the value `None` from arguments that were not given.[^8]

[![^8]

This `setattr` call triggers `Checked.__setattr__`, shown in [Example 24-6](#checked_class_bottom_ex).

[![^9]

If there are remaining items in `kwargs`, their names do not match any of the declared fields, and `__init__` will fail.

[![^10]

The error is reported by `__flag_unknown_attrs`, listed in [Example 24-6](#checked_class_bottom_ex). It takes a `*names` argument with the unknown attribute names. I used a single asterisk in `*kwargs` to pass its keys as a sequence of arguments.

##### __init_subclass__ Is Not a Typical Class Method

The `@classmethod` decorator is never used with `__init_subclass__`, but that doesn’t mean much, because the `__new__` special method behaves as a class method even without `@classmethod`. The first argument that Python passes to `__init_subclass__` is a class. However, it is never the class where `__init_subclass__` is implemented: it is a newly defined subclass of that class. That’s unlike `__new__` and every other class method that I know about. Therefore, I think `__init_subclass__` is not a class method in the usual sense, and it is misleading to name the first argument `cls`. The [`__init_suclass__` documentation](https://fpy.li/24-8) names the argument `cls` but explains: “…called whenever the containing class is subclassed. `cls` is then the new subclass.”

Now let’s see the remaining methods of the `Checked` class, continuing from [Example 24-5](#checked_class_top_ex). Note that I prepended `_` to the `_fields` and `_asdict` method names for the same reason the `collections.namedtuple` API does: to reduce the chance of name clashes with user-defined field names.

##### Example 24-6. initsub/checkedlib.py: remaining methods of the `Checked` class

```
    
```

[![^1]

Intercept all attempts to set an instance attribute. This is needed to prevent setting an unknown attribute.

[![^2]

If the attribute `name` is known, fetch the corresponding `descriptor`.

[![^3]

Usually we don’t need to call the descriptor `__set__` explicitly. It was necessary in this case because `__setattr__` intercepts all attempts to set an attribute on the instance, including in the presence of an overriding descriptor such as `Field`.[^9]

[![^4]

Otherwise, the attribute `name` is unknown, and an exception will be raised by `__flag_unknown_attrs`.

[![^5]

Build a helpful error message listing all unexpected arguments, and raise `AttributeError`. This is a rare example of the `NoReturn` special type, covered in [“NoReturn”](ch08.html#noreturn_sec).

[![^6]

Create a `dict` from the attributes of a `Movie` object. I’d call this method `_as_dict`, but I followed the convention started by the `_asdict` method in `collections.namedtuple`.

[![^7]

Implementing a nice `__repr__` is the main reason for having `_asdict` in this example.

The `Checked` example illustrates how to handle overriding descriptors when implementing `__setattr__` to block arbitrary attribute setting after instantiation. It is debatable whether implementing `__setattr__` is worthwhile in this example. Without it, setting `movie.director = 'Greta Gerwig'` would succeed, but the `director` attribute would not be checked in any way, and would not appear in the `__repr__` nor would it be included in the `dict` returned by `_asdict`—both defined in [Example 24-6](#checked_class_bottom_ex).

In _record_factory.py_ ([Example 24-2](#record_factory_ex)) I solved this issue using the `__slots__` class attribute. However, this simpler solution is not viable in this case, as explained next.