# Chapter 16. Operator Overloading

> There are some things that I kind of feel torn about, like operator overloading. I left out operator overloading as a fairly personal choice because I had seen too many people abuse it in C++.
> 
> James Gosling, creator of Java[^1]

In Python, you can compute compound interest using a formula written like this:

```
interest
```

Operators that appear between operands, like `1 + rate`, are _infix operators_. In Python, the infix operators can handle any arbitrary type. Thus, if you are dealing with real money, you can make sure that `principal`, `rate`, and `periods` are exact numbers—instances of the Python `decimal.Decimal` class—and that formula will work as written, producing an exact result.

But in Java, if you switch from `float` to `BigDecimal` to get exact results, you can’t use infix operators anymore, because they only work with the primitive types. This is the same formula coded to work with `BigDecimal` numbers in Java:

```
BigDecimal
```

It’s clear that infix operators make formulas more readable. Operator overloading is necessary to support infix operator notation with user-defined or extension types, such as NumPy arrays. Having operator overloading in a high-level, easy-to-use language was probably a key reason for the huge success of Python in data science, including financial and scientific applications.

In [“Emulating Numeric Types”](ch01.html#data_model_emulating_sec) ([Chapter 1](ch01.html#data_model)) we saw some trivial implementations of operators in a bare-bones `Vector` class. The `__add__` and `__mul__` methods in [Example 1-2](ch01.html#ex_vector2d) were written to show how special methods support operator overloading, but there are subtle problems in their implementations that we overlooked. Also, in [Example 11-2](ch11.html#ex_vector2d_v0), we noted that the `Vector2d.__eq__` method considers this to be `True`: `Vector(3, 4) == [3, 4]`—which may or not make sense. We will address these matters in this chapter, as well as:

- How an infix operator method should signal it cannot handle an operand
    
- Using duck typing or goose typing to deal with operands of various types
    
- The special behavior of the rich comparison operators (e.g., `==`, `>`, `<=`, etc.)
    
- The default handling of augmented assignment operators such as `+=`, and how to overload them