# Using @ as an Infix Operator

The `@` sign is well-known as the prefix of function decorators, but since 2015, it can also be used as an infix operator. For years, the dot product was written as `numpy.dot(a, b)` in NumPy. The function call notation makes longer formulas harder to translate from mathematical notation to Python,[^5], which was implemented in Python 3.5. Today, you can write `a @ b` to compute the dot product of two NumPy arrays.

The `@` operator is supported by the special methods `__matmul__`, `__rmatmul__`, and `__imatmul__`, named for “matrix multiplication.” These methods are not used anywhere in the standard library at this time, but are recognized by the interpreter since Python 3.5, so the NumPy team—and the rest of us—can support the `@` operator in user-defined types. The parser was also changed to handle the new operator (`a @ b` was a syntax error in Python 3.4).

These simple tests show how `@` should work with `Vector` instances:

```
>>> 
```

[Example 16-12](#ex_vector_v7_matmul) shows the code of the relevant special methods.

##### Example 16-12. vector_v7.py: operator `@` methods

```
class
```

[![^1]

Both operands must implement `__len__` and `__iter__`…

[![^2]

…and have the same length to allow…

[![^3]

…a beautiful application of `sum`, `zip`, and generator expression.

# New zip() Feature in Python 3.10

The `zip` built-in accepts a `strict` keyword-only optional argument since Python 3.10. When `strict=True`, the function raises `ValueError` when the iterables have different lengths. The default is `False`. This new strict behavior is in line with Python’s [_fail fast_](https://fpy.li/16-8) philosophy. In [Example 16-12](#ex_vector_v7_matmul), I’d replace the inner `if` with a `try/except ValueError` and add `strict=True` to the `zip` call.

[Example 16-12](#ex_vector_v7_matmul) is a good example of _goose typing_ in practice. If we tested the `other` operand against `Vector`, we’d deny users the flexibility of using lists or arrays as operands to `@`. As long as one operand is a `Vector`, our `@` implementation supports other operands that are instances of `abc.Sized` and `abc.Iterable`. Both of these ABCs implement the `__subclasshook__`, therefore any object providing `__len__` and `__iter__` satisfies our test—no need to actually subclass those ABCs or even register with them, as explained in [“Structural Typing with ABCs”](ch13.html#subclasshook_sec). In particular, our `Vector` class does not subclass either `abc.Sized` or `abc.Iterable`, but it does pass the `isinstance` checks against those ABCs because it has the necessary methods.

Let’s review the arithmetic operators supported by Python, before diving into the special category of [“Rich Comparison Operators”](#rich_comp_op_sec).