## defaultdict: Another Take on Missing Keys

A `collections.defaultdict` instance creates items with a default value on demand whenever a missing key is searched using `d[k]` syntax. [Example 3-6](#index_default_ex) uses `defaultdict` to provide another elegant solution to the word index task from [Example 3-5](#index_ex).

Here is how it works: when instantiating a `defaultdict`, you provide a callable to produce a default value whenever `__getitem__` is passed a nonexistent key argument.

For example, given a `defaultdict` created as `dd = defaultdict(list)`, if `'new-key'` is not in `dd`, the expression `dd['new-key']` does the following steps:

1. Calls `list()` to create a new list.
    
2. Inserts the list into `dd` using `'new-key'` as key.
    
3. Returns a reference to that list.
    

The callable that produces the default values is held in an instance attribute named `default_factory`.

##### Example 3-6. index_default.py: using `defaultdict` instead of the `setdefault` method

```
"""Build an index mapping word -> list of occurrences"""
```

[![^1]

Create a `defaultdict` with the `list` constructor as `default_factory`.

[![^2]

If `word` is not initially in the `index`, the `default_factory` is called to produce the missing value, which in this case is an empty `list` that is then assigned to `index[word]` and returned, so the `.append(location)` operation always succeeds.

If no `default_factory` is provided, the usual `KeyError` is raised for missing keys.

###### Warning

The `default_factory` of a `defaultdict` is only invoked to provide default values for `__getitem__` calls, and not for the other methods. For example, if `dd` is a `defaultdict`, and `k` is a missing key, `dd[k]` will call the `default_factory` to create a default value, but `dd.get(k)` still returns `None`, and `k in dd` is `False`.

The mechanism that makes `defaultdict` work by calling `default_factory` is the `__missing__` special method, a feature that we discuss next.