## Inconsistent Usage of __missing__ in the Standard Library

Consider the following scenarios, and how the missing key lookups are affected:

`dict` subclass

A subclass of `dict` implementing only `__missing__` and no other method. In this case, `__missing__` may be called only on `d[k]`, which will use the `__getitem__` inherited from `dict`.

`collections.UserDict` subclass

Likewise, a subclass of `UserDict` implementing only `__missing__` and no other method. The `get` method inherited from `UserDict` calls `__getitem__`. This means `__missing__` may be called to handle lookups with `d[k]` and `d.get(k)`.

`abc.Mapping` subclass with the simplest possible `__getitem__`

A minimal subclass of `abc.Mapping` implementing `__missing__` and the required abstract methods, including an implementation of `__getitem__` that does not call `__missing__`. The `__missing__` method is never triggered in this class.

`abc.Mapping` subclass with `__getitem__` calling `__missing__`

A minimal subclass of `abc.Mapping` implementing `__missing__` and the required abstract methods, including an implementation of `__getitem__` that calls `__missing__`. The `__missing__` method is triggered in this class for missing key lookups made with `d[k]`, `d.get(k)`, and `k in d`.

See [_missing.py_](https://fpy.li/3-7) in the example code repository for demonstrations of the scenarios described here.

The four scenarios just described assume minimal implementations. If your subclass implements `__getitem__`, `get`, and `__contains__`, then you can make those methods use `__missing__` or not, depending on your needs. The point of this section is to show that you must be careful when subclassing standard library mappings to use `__missing__`, because the base classes support different behaviors by default.

Don’t forget that the behavior of `setdefault` and `update` is also affected by key lookup. And finally, depending on the logic of your `__missing__`, you may need to implement special logic in `__setitem__`, to avoid inconsistent or surprising behavior. We’ll see an example of this in [“Subclassing UserDict Instead of dict”](#sublcassing_userdict_sec).

So far we have covered the `dict` and `defaultdict` mapping types, but the standard library comes with other mapping implementations, which we discuss next.