## The __missing__ Method

Underlying the way mappings deal with missing keys is the aptly named `__missing__` method. This method is not defined in the base `dict` class, but `dict` is aware of it: if you subclass `dict` and provide a `__missing__` method, the standard `dict.__getitem__` will call it whenever a key is not found, instead of raising `KeyError`.

Suppose you’d like a mapping where keys are converted to `str` when looked up. A concrete use case is a device library for IoT,[^6] shows how such a mapping would work.

##### Example 3-7. When searching for a nonstring key, `StrKeyDict0` converts it to `str` when it is not found

```
Tests
```

[Example 3-8](#ex_strkeydict0) implements a class `StrKeyDict0` that passes the preceding doctests.

###### Tip

A better way to create a user-defined mapping type is to subclass `collections.UserDict` instead of `dict` (as we will do in [Example 3-9](#ex_strkeydict)). Here we subclass `dict` just to show that `__missing__` is supported by the built-in `dict.__getitem__` method.

##### Example 3-8. `StrKeyDict0` converts nonstring keys to `str` on lookup (see tests in [Example 3-7](#ex_strkeydict0_tests))

```
class
```

[![^1]

`StrKeyDict0` inherits from `dict`.

[![^2]

Check whether `key` is already a `str`. If it is, and it’s missing, raise `KeyError`.

[![^3]

Build `str` from `key` and look it up.

[![^4]

The `get` method delegates to `__getitem__` by using the `self[key]` notation; that gives the opportunity for our `__missing__` to act.

[![^5]

If a `KeyError` was raised, `__missing__` already failed, so we return the `default`.

[![^6]

Search for unmodified key (the instance may contain non-`str` keys), then for a `str` built from the key.

Take a moment to consider why the test `isinstance(key, str)` is necessary in the `__missing__` implementation.

Without that test, our `__missing__` method would work OK for any key `k`—`str` or not `str`—whenever `str(k)` produced an existing key. But if `str(k)` is not an existing key, we’d have an infinite recursion. In the last line of `__missing__`, `self[str(key)]` would call `__getitem__`, passing that `str` key, which in turn would call `__missing__` again.

The `__contains__` method is also needed for consistent behavior in this example, because the operation `k in d` calls it, but the method inherited from `dict` does not fall back to invoking `__missing__`. There is a subtle detail in our implementation of `__contains__`: we do not check for the key in the usual Pythonic way—`k` in `my_dict`—because `str(key) in self` would recursively call `__contains__`. We avoid this by explicitly looking up the key in `self.keys()`.

A search like `k in my_dict.keys()` is efficient in Python 3 even for very large mappings because `dict.keys()` returns a view, which is similar to a set, as we’ll see in [“Set Operations on dict Views”](#set_ops_dict_views_sec). However, remember that `k in my_dict` does the same job, and is faster because it avoids the attribute lookup to find the `.keys` method.

I had a specific reason to use `self.keys()` in the `__contains__` method in [Example 3-8](#ex_strkeydict0). The check for the unmodified key—`key in self.keys()`—is necessary for correctness because `StrKeyDict0` does not enforce that all keys in the dictionary must be of type `str`. Our only goal with this simple example is to make searching “friendlier” and not enforce types.

###### Warning

User-defined classes derived from standard library mappings may or may not use `__missing__` as a fallback in their implementations of `__getitem__`, `get`, or `__contains__`, as explained in the next section.