# Overriding Class Attributes

A distinctive feature of Python is how class attributes can be used as default values for instance attributes. In `Vector2d` there is the `typecode` class attribute. It’s used twice in the `__bytes__` method, but we read it as `self.typecode` by design. Because `Vector2d` instances are created without a `typecode` attribute of their own, `self.typecode` will get the `Vector2d.typecode` class attribute by default.

But if you write to an instance attribute that does not exist, you create a new instance attribute—e.g., a `typecode` instance attribute—and the class attribute by the same name is untouched. However, from then on, whenever the code handling that instance reads `self.typecode`, the instance `typecode` will be retrieved, effectively shadowing the class attribute by the same name. This opens the possibility of customizing an individual instance with a different `typecode`.

The default `Vector2d.typecode` is `'d'`, meaning each vector component will be represented as an 8-byte double precision float when exporting to `bytes`. If we set the `typecode` of a `Vector2d` instance to `'f'` prior to exporting, each component will be exported as a 4-byte single precision float. [Example 11-18](#typecode_instance_demo) demonstrates.

###### Note

We are discussing adding a custom instance attribute, therefore [Example 11-18](#typecode_instance_demo) uses the `Vector2d` implementation without `__slots__`, as listed in [Example 11-11](#ex_vector2d_v3_full).

##### Example 11-18. Customizing an instance by setting the `typecode` attribute that was formerly inherited from the class

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Default `bytes` representation is 17 bytes long.

[![^2]

Set `typecode` to `'f'` in the `v1` instance.

[![^3]

Now the `bytes` dump is 9 bytes long.

[![^4]

`Vector2d.typecode` is unchanged; only the `v1` instance uses `typecode` `'f'`.

Now it should be clear why the `bytes` export of a `Vector2d` is prefixed by the `typecode`: we wanted to support different export formats.

If you want to change a class attribute, you must set it on the class directly, not through an instance. You could change the default `typecode` for all instances (that don’t have their own `typecode`) by doing this:

```
>>> 
```

However, there is an idiomatic Python way of achieving a more permanent effect, and being more explicit about the change. Because class attributes are public, they are inherited by subclasses, so it’s common practice to subclass just to customize a class data attribute. The Django class-based views use this technique extensively. [Example 11-19](#typecode_subclass_demo) shows how.

##### Example 11-19. The `ShortVector2d` is a subclass of `Vector2d`, which only overwrites the default `typecode`

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Create `ShortVector2d` as a `Vector2d` subclass just to overwrite the `typecode` class attribute.

[![^2]

Build `ShortVector2d` instance `sv` for demonstration.

[![^3]

Inspect the `repr` of `sv`.

[![^4]

Check that the length of the exported bytes is 9, not 17 as before.

This example also explains why I did not hardcode the `class_name` in `Vector2d.​__repr__`, but instead got it from `type(self).__name__`, like this:

    `# inside class Vector2d:`

    `def` `__repr__``(``self``):`
        `class_name` `=` `type``(``self``)``.``__name__`
        `return` `'``{}``(``{!r}``,` `{!r}``)'``.``format``(``class_name``,` `*``self``)`

If I had hardcoded the `class_name`, subclasses of `Vector2d` like `ShortVector2d` would have to overwrite `__repr__` just to change the `class_name`. By reading the name from the `type` of the instance, I made `__repr__` safer to inherit.

This ends our coverage of building a simple class that leverages the data model to play well with the rest of Python: offering different object representations, providing a custom formatting code, exposing read-only attributes, and supporting `hash()` to integrate with sets and mappings.