# Formatted Displays

The f-strings, the `format()` built-in function, and the `str.format()` method delegate the actual formatting to each type by calling their `.__format__(format_spec)` method. The `format_spec` is a formatting specifier, which is either:

- The second argument in `format(my_obj, format_spec)`, or
    
- Whatever appears after the colon in a replacement field delimited with `{}` inside an f-string or the `fmt` in `fmt.str.format()`
    

For example:

`>>>` `brl` `=` `1` `/` `4.82`  `# BRL to USD currency conversion rate`
`>>>` `brl`
`0.20746887966804978`
`>>>` `format``(``brl``,` `'``0.4f``'``)`  [![^1]
`'0.2075'`
`>>>` `'``1 BRL =` `{rate:0.2f}` `USD``'``.``format``(``rate``=``brl``)`  [![^2]
`'1 BRL = 0.21 USD'`
`>>>` `f``'``1 USD =` `{``1` `/` `brl``:``0.2f``}` `BRL``'`  [![^3]
`'1 USD = 4.82 BRL'`

[![^1]

Formatting specifier is `'0.4f'`.

[![^2]

Formatting specifier is `'0.2f'`. The `rate` part in the replacement field is not part of the formatting specifier. It determines which keyword argument of `.format()` goes into that replacement field.

[![^3]

Again, the specifier is `'0.2f'`. The `1 / brl` expression is not part of it.

The second and third callouts make an important point: a format string such as `'{0.mass:5.3e}'` actually uses two separate notations. The `'0.mass'` to the left of the colon is the `field_name` part of the replacement field syntax, and it can be an arbitrary expression in an f-string. The `'5.3e'` after the colon is the formatting specifier. The notation used in the formatting specifier is called the [Format Specification Mini-Language](https://fpy.li/11-3).

###### Tip

If f-strings, `format()`, and `str.format()` are new to you, classroom experience tells me it’s best to study the `format()` built-in function first, which uses just the [Format Specification Mini-Language](https://fpy.li/fmtspec). After you get the gist of that, read [“Formatted string literals”](https://fpy.li/11-4) and [“Format String Syntax”](https://fpy.li/11-5) to learn about the `{:}` replacement field notation, used in f-strings and the `str.format()` method (including the `!s`, `!r`, and `!a` conversion flags). F-strings don’t make `str.format()` obsolete: most of the time f-strings solve the problem, but sometimes it’s better to specify the formatting string elsewhere, and not where it will be rendered.

A few built-in types have their own presentation codes in the Format Specification Mini-Language. For example—among several other codes—the `int` type supports `b` and `x` for base 2 and base 16 output, respectively, while `float` implements `f` for a fixed-point display and `%` for a percentage display:

```
>>> 
```

The Format Specification Mini-Language is extensible because each class gets to interpret the `format_spec` argument as it likes. For instance, the classes in the `datetime` module use the same format codes in the `strftime()` functions and in their `__format__` methods. Here are a couple of examples using the `format()` built-in and the `str.format()` method:

```
>>> 
```

If a class has no `__format__`, the method inherited from `object` returns `str(my_object)`. Because `Vector2d` has a `__str__`, this works:

```
>>> 
```

However, if you pass a format specifier, `object.__format__` raises `TypeError`:

```
>>> 
```

We will fix that by implementing our own format mini-language. The first step will be to assume the format specifier provided by the user is intended to format each `float` component of the vector. This is the result we want:

```
>>> 
```

[Example 11-5](#ex_format_t1) implements `__format__` to produce the displays just shown.

##### Example 11-5. `Vector2d.__format__` method, take #1

```
    
```

[![^1]

Use the `format` built-in to apply the `fmt_spec` to each vector component, building an iterable of formatted strings.

[![^2]

Plug the formatted strings in the formula `'(x, y)'`.

Now let’s add a custom formatting code to our mini-language: if the format specifier ends with a `'p'`, we’ll display the vector in polar coordinates: `<r, θ>`, where `r` is the magnitude and θ (theta) is the angle in radians. The rest of the format specifier (whatever comes before the `'p'`) will be used as before.

###### Tip

When choosing the letter for the custom format code, I avoided overlapping with codes used by other types. In [Format Specification Mini-Language](https://fpy.li/11-3), we see that integers use the codes `'bcdoxXn'`, floats use `'eEfFgGn%'`, and strings use `'s'`. So I picked `'p'` for polar coordinates. Because each class interprets these codes independently, reusing a code letter in a custom format for a new type is not an error, but may be confusing to users.

To generate polar coordinates, we already have the `__abs__` method for the magnitude, and we’ll code a simple `angle` method using the `math.atan2()` function to get the angle. This is the code:

    `# inside the Vector2d class`

    `def` `angle``(``self``):`
        `return` `math``.``atan2``(``self``.``y``,` `self``.``x``)`

With that, we can enhance our `__format__` to produce polar coordinates. See [Example 11-6](#ex_format_t2).

##### Example 11-6. `Vector2d.__format__` method, take #2, now with polar coordinates

```
    
```

[![^1]

Format ends with `'p'`: use polar coordinates.

[![^2]

Remove `'p'` suffix from `fmt_spec`.

[![^3]

Build `tuple` of polar coordinates: `(magnitude, angle)`.

[![^4]

Configure outer format with angle brackets.

[![^5]

Otherwise, use `x, y` components of `self` for rectangular coordinates.

[![^6]

Configure outer format with parentheses.

[![^7]

Generate iterable with components as formatted strings.

[![^8]

Plug formatted strings into outer format.

With [Example 11-6](#ex_format_t2), we get results similar to these:

```
>>> 
```

As this section shows, it’s not hard to extend the Format Specification Mini-Language to support user-defined types.

Now let’s move to a subject that’s not just about appearances: we will make our `Vector2d` hashable, so we can build sets of vectors, or use them as `dict` keys.