# A Hashable Vector2d

As defined, so far our `Vector2d` instances are unhashable, so we can’t put them in a `set`:

```
>>> 
```

To make a `Vector2d` hashable, we must implement `__hash__` (`__eq__` is also required, and we already have it). We also need to make vector instances immutable, as we’ve seen in [“What Is Hashable”](ch03.html#what_is_hashable).

Right now, anyone can do `v1.x = 7`, and there is nothing in the code to suggest that changing a `Vector2d` is forbidden. This is the behavior we want:

```
>>> 
```

We’ll do that by making the `x` and `y` components read-only properties in [Example 11-7](#ex_vector2d_v3).

##### Example 11-7. vector2d_v3.py: only the changes needed to make `Vector2d` immutable are shown here; see full listing in [Example 11-11](#ex_vector2d_v3_full)

```
class
```

[![^1]

Use exactly two leading underscores (with zero or one trailing underscore) to make an attribute private.[^6]

[![^2]

The `@property` decorator marks the getter method of a property.

[![^3]

The getter method is named after the public property it exposes: `x`.

[![^4]

Just return `self.__x`.

[![^5]

Repeat the same formula for `y` property.

[![^6]

Every method that just reads the `x`, `y` components can stay as it was, reading the public properties via `self.x` and `self.y` instead of the private attribute, so this listing omits the rest of the code for the class.

###### Note

`Vector.x` and `Vector.y` are examples of read-only properties. Read/write properties will be covered in [Chapter 22](ch22.html#dynamic_attributes), where we dive deeper into `@property`.

Now that our vectors are reasonably safe from accidental mutation, we can implement the `__hash__` method. It should return an `int` and ideally take into account the hashes of the object attributes that are also used in the `__eq__` method, because objects that compare equal should have the same hash. The `__hash__` special method [documentation](https://fpy.li/11-7) suggests computing the hash of a tuple with the components, so that’s what we do in [Example 11-8](#ex_vector2d_v3_hash).

##### Example 11-8. vector2d_v3.py: implementation of _hash_

    `# inside class Vector2d:`

    `def` `__hash__``(``self``):`
        `return` `hash``((``self``.``x``,` `self``.``y``))`

With the addition of the `__hash__` method, we now have hashable vectors:

```
>>> 
```

###### Tip

It’s not strictly necessary to implement properties or otherwise protect the instance attributes to create a hashable type. Implementing `__hash__` and `__eq__` correctly is all it takes. But the value of a hashable object is never supposed to change, so this provided a good excuse to talk about read-only properties.

If you are creating a type that has a sensible scalar numeric value, you may also implement the `__int__` and `__float__` methods, invoked by the `int()` and `float()` constructors, which are used for type coercion in some contexts. There is also a `__complex__` method to support the `complex()` built-in constructor. Perhaps `Vector2d` should provide `__complex__`, but I’ll leave that as an exercise for you.