## Generic Mappings

Generic mapping types are annotated as `MappingType[KeyType, ValueType]`. The built-in `dict` and the mapping types in `collections` and `collections.abc` accept that notation in Python ≥ 3.9. For earlier versions, you must use `typing.Dict` and other mapping types from the `typing` module, as described in [“Legacy Support and Deprecated Collection Types”](#legacy_deprecated_typing_box).

[Example 8-14](#charindex_ex) shows a practical use of a function returning an [inverted index](https://fpy.li/8-19) to search Unicode characters by name—a variation of [Example 4-21](ch04.html#ex_cfpy) more suitable for server-side code that we’ll study in [Chapter 21](ch21.html#async_ch).

Given starting and ending Unicode character codes, `name_index` returns a `dict[str, set[str]]`, which is an inverted index mapping each word to a set of characters that have that word in their names. For example, after indexing ASCII characters from 32 to 64, here are the sets of characters mapped to the words `'SIGN'` and `'DIGIT'`, and how to find the character named `'DIGIT EIGHT'`:

```
>>> 
```

[Example 8-14](#charindex_ex) shows the source code for _charindex.py_ with the `name_index` function. Besides a `dict[]` type hint, this example has three features appearing for the first time in the book.

##### Example 8-14. _charindex.py_

```
import
```

[![^1]

`tokenize` is a generator function. [Chapter 17](ch17.html#iterables2generators) is about generators.

[![^2]

The local variable `index` is annotated. Without the hint, Mypy says: `Need type annotation for 'index' (hint: "index: dict[<type>, <type>] = ...")`.

[![^3]

I used the walrus operator `:=` in the `if` condition. It assigns the result of the `unicodedata.name()` call to `name`, and the whole expression evaluates to that result. When the result is `''`, that’s falsy, and the `index` is not updated.[^11]

###### Note

When using a `dict` as a record, it is common to have all keys of the `str` type, with values of different types depending on the keys. That is covered in [“TypedDict”](ch15.html#typeddict_sec).