## Generic Collections

Most Python collections are heterogeneous. For example, you can put any mixture of different types in a `list`. However, in practice that’s not very useful: if you put objects in a collection, you are likely to want to operate on them later, and usually this means they must share at least one common method.[^9]

Generic types can be declared with type parameters to specify the type of the items they can handle.

For example, a `list` can be parameterized to constrain the type of the elements in it, as you can see in [Example 8-8](#tokenize_ex).

##### Example 8-8. `tokenize` with type hints for Python ≥ 3.9

```
def
```

In Python ≥ 3.9, it means that `tokenize` returns a `list` where every item is of type `str`.

The annotations `stuff: list` and `stuff: list[Any]` mean the same thing: `stuff` is a list of objects of any type.

###### Tip

If you are using Python 3.8 or earlier, the concept is the same, but you need more code to make it work—as explained in the optional box [“Legacy Support and Deprecated Collection Types”](#legacy_deprecated_typing_box).

[PEP 585—Type Hinting Generics In Standard Collections](https://fpy.li/8-16) lists collections from the standard library accepting generic type hints. The following list shows only those collections that use the simplest form of generic type hint, `container[item]`:

list        collections.deque        abc.Sequence   abc.MutableSequence
set         abc.Container            abc.Set        abc.MutableSet
frozenset   abc.Collection

The `tuple` and mapping types support more complex type hints, as we’ll see in their respective sections.

As of Python 3.10, there is no good way to annotate `array.array`, taking into account the `typecode` constructor argument, which determines whether integers or floats are stored in the array. An even harder problem is how to type check integer ranges to prevent `OverflowError` at runtime when adding elements to arrays. For example, an `array` with `typecode='B'` can only hold `int` values from 0 to 255. Currently, Python’s static type system is not up to this challenge.

##### Legacy Support and Deprecated Collection Types

(You may skip this box if you only use Python 3.9 or later.)

For Python 3.7 and 3.8, you need a `__future__` import to make the `[]` notation work with built-in collections such as `list`, as shown in [Example 8-9](#tokenize_3_7_ex).

##### Example 8-9. `tokenize` with type hints for Python ≥ 3.7

```
from
```

The `__future__` import does not work with Python 3.6 or earlier. [Example 8-10](#tokenize_3_5_ex) shows how to annotate `tokenize` in a way that works with Python ≥ 3.5.

##### Example 8-10. `tokenize` with type hints for Python ≥ 3.5

```
from
```

To provide the initial support for generic type hints, the authors of PEP 484 created dozens of generic types in the `typing` module. [Table 8-1](#generic_collections_tbl) shows some of them. For the full list, visit the [_typing_](https://fpy.li/typing) documentation.

Table 8-1. Some collection types and their type hint equivalents
|Collection|Type hint equivalent|
|---|---|
|`list`|`typing.List`|
|`set`|`typing.Set`|
|`frozenset`|`typing.FrozenSet`|
|`collections.deque`|`typing.Deque`|
|`collections.abc.MutableSequence`|`typing.MutableSequence`|
|`collections.abc.Sequence`|`typing.Sequence`|
|`collections.abc.Set`|`typing.AbstractSet`|
|`collections.abc.MutableSet`|`typing.MutableSet`|

[PEP 585—Type Hinting Generics In Standard Collections](https://fpy.li/pep585) started a multiyear process to improve the usability of generic type hints. We can summarize that process in four steps:

1. Introduce `from __future__ import annotations` in Python 3.7 to enable the use of standard library classes as generics with `list[str]` notation.
    
2. Make that behavior the default in Python 3.9: `list[str]` now works without the `future` import.
    
3. Deprecate all the redundant generic types from the `typing` module.[^10] Deprecation warnings will not be issued by the Python interpreter because type checkers should flag the deprecated types when the checked program targets Python 3.9 or newer.
    
4. Remove those redundant generic types in the first version of Python released five years after Python 3.9. At the current cadence, that could be Python 3.14, a.k.a Python Pi.
    

Now let’s see how to annotate generic tuples.