# Acknowledgments

I did not expect updating a Python book five years later to be such a major undertaking, but it was. Marta Mello, my beloved wife, was always there when I needed her. My dear friend Leonardo Rochael helped me from the earliest writing to the final technical review, including consolidating and double-checking the feedback from the other tech reviewers, readers, and editors. I honestly don’t know if I’d have made it without your support, Marta and Leo. Thank you so much!

Jürgen Gmach, Caleb Hattingh, Jess Males, Leonardo Rochael, and Miroslav Šedivý were the outstanding technical review team for the second edition. They reviewed the whole book. Bill Behrman, Bruce Eckel, Renato Oliveira, and Rodrigo Bernardo Pimentel reviewed specific chapters. Their many suggestions from different perspectives made the book much better.

Many readers sent corrections or made other contributions during the early release phase, including: Guilherme Alves, Christiano Anderson, Konstantin Baikov, K. Alex Birch, Michael Boesl, Lucas Brunialti, Sergio Cortez, Gino Crecco, Chukwuerika Dike, Juan Esteras, Federico Fissore, Will Frey, Tim Gates, Alexander Hagerman, Chen Hanxiao, Sam Hyeong, Simon Ilincev, Parag Kalra, Tim King, David Kwast, Tina Lapine, Wanpeng Li, Guto Maia, Scott Martindale, Mark Meyer, Andy McFarland, Chad McIntire, Diego Rabatone Oliveira, Francesco Piccoli, Meredith Rawls, Michael Robinson, Federico Tula Rovaletti, Tushar Sadhwani, Arthur Constantino Scardua, Randal L. Schwartz, Avichai Sefati, Guannan Shen, William Simpson, Vivek Vashist, Jerry Zhang, Paul Zuradzki—and others who did not want to be named, sent corrections after I delivered the draft, or are omitted because I failed to record their names—sorry.

During my research, I learned about typing, concurrency, pattern matching, and metaprogramming while interacting with Michael Albert, Pablo Aguilar, Kaleb Barrett, David Beazley, J. S. O. Bueno, Bruce Eckel, Martin Fowler, Ivan Levkivskyi, Alex Martelli, Peter Norvig, Sebastian Rittau, Guido van Rossum, Carol Willing, and Jelle Zijlstra.

O’Reilly editors Jeff Bleiel, Jill Leonard, and Amelia Blevins made suggestions that improved the flow of the book in many places. Jeff Bleiel and production editor Danny Elfanbaum supported me throughout this long marathon.

The insights and suggestions of every one of them made the book better and more accurate. Inevitably, there will still be bugs of my own creation in the final product. I apologize in advance.

Finally, I want to extend my heartfelt thanks to my colleagues at Thoughtworks Brazil—and especially to my sponsor, Alexey Bôas—who supported this project in many ways, all the way.

Of course, everyone who helped me understand Python and write the first edition now deserves double thanks. There would be no second edition without a successful first.