## Runtime Checkable Static Protocols

In the Typing Map ([Figure 13-1](#type_systems_described)), `typing.Protocol` appears in the static checking area—the bottom half of the diagram. However, when defining a `typing.Protocol` subclass, you can use the `@runtime_checkable` decorator to make that protocol support `isinstance/issubclass` checks at runtime. This works because `typing.Protocol` is an ABC, therefore it supports the `__subclasshook__` we saw in [“Structural Typing with ABCs”](#subclasshook_sec).

As of Python 3.9, the `typing` module includes seven ready-to-use protocols that are runtime checkable. Here are two of them, quoted directly from the [`typing` documentation](https://fpy.li/13-30):

`class typing.SupportsComplex`

An ABC with one abstract method, `__complex__`.

`class typing.SupportsFloat`

An ABC with one abstract method, `__float__`.

These protocols are designed to check numeric types for “convertibility”: if an object `o` implements `__complex__`, then you should be able to get a `complex` by invoking `complex(o)`—because the `__complex__` special method exists to support the `complex()` built-in function.

[Example 13-14](#supportscomplex_ex) shows the [source code](https://fpy.li/13-31) for the `typing.SupportsComplex` protocol.

##### Example 13-14. `typing.SupportsComplex` protocol source code

```
@runtime_checkable
```

The key is the `__complex__` abstract method.[^18] During static type checking, an object will be considered _consistent-with_ the `SupportsComplex` protocol if it implements a `__complex__` method that takes only `self` and returns a `complex`.

Thanks to the `@runtime_checkable` class decorator applied to `SupportsComplex`, that protocol can also be used with `isinstance` checks in [Example 13-15](#repeatable_protocol_demo_ex).

##### Example 13-15. Using `SupportsComplex` at runtime

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`complex64` is one of five complex number types provided by NumPy.

[![^2]

None of the NumPy complex types subclass the built-in `complex`.

[![^3]

But NumPy’s complex types implement `__complex__`, so they comply with the `SupportsComplex` protocol.

[![^4]

Therefore, you can create built-in `complex` objects from them.

[![^5]

Sadly, the `complex` built-in type does not implement `__complex__`, although `complex(c)` works fine if `c` is a `complex`.

As a result of that last point, if you want to test whether an object `c` is a `complex` or `SupportsComplex`, you can provide a tuple of types as the second argument to `isinstance`, like this:

```
isinstance
```

An alternative would be to use the `Complex` ABC, defined in the `numbers` module. The built-in `complex` type and the NumPy `complex64` and `complex128` types are all registered as virtual subclasses of `numbers.Complex`, therefore this works:

```
>>>
```

I recommended using the `numbers` ABCs in the first edition of _Fluent Python_, but now that’s no longer good advice, because those ABCs are not recognized by the static type checkers, as we’ll see in [“The numbers ABCs and Numeric Protocols”](#numbers_abc_proto_sec).

In this section I wanted to demonstrate that a runtime checkable protocol works with `isinstance`, but it turns out this is example not a particularly good use case of `isinstance`, as the sidebar [“Duck Typing Is Your Friend”](#duck_typing_friend_box) explains.

###### Tip

If you’re using an external type checker, there is one advantage of explict `isinstance` checks: when you write an `if` statement where the condition is `isinstance(o, MyType)`, then Mypy can infer that inside the `if` block, the type of the `o` object is _consistent-with_ `MyType`.

##### Duck Typing Is Your Friend

Very often at runtime, duck typing is the best approach for type checking: instead of calling `isinstance` or `hasattr`, just try the operations you need to do on the object, and handle exceptions as needed. Here is a concrete example.

Continuing the previous discussion—given an object `o` that I need to use as a complex number, this would be one approach:

```
if
```

The goose typing approach would be to use the `numbers.Complex` ABC:

```
if
```

However, I prefer to leverage duck typing and do this using the EAFP principle—it’s easier to ask for forgiveness than permission:

```
try
```

And, if all you’re going to do is raise a `TypeError` anyway, then I’d omit the `try/except/raise` statements and just write this:

```
c
```

In this last case, if `o` is not an acceptable type, Python will raise an exception with a very clear message. For example, this is what I get if `o` is a `tuple`:

TypeError: complex() first argument must be a string or a number, not 'tuple'

I find the duck typing approach much better in this case.

Now that we’ve seen how to use static protocols at runtime with preexisting types like `complex` and `numpy.complex64`, we need to discuss the limitations of runtime checkable protocols.