## Designing a Static Protocol

While studying goose typing, we saw the `Tombola` ABC in [“Defining and Using an ABC”](#defining_using_abc_sec). Here we’ll see how to define a similar interface using a static protocol.

The `Tombola` ABC specifies two methods: `pick` and `load`. We could define a static protocol with these two methods as well, but I learned from the Go community that single-method protocols make static duck typing more useful and flexible. The Go standard library has several interfaces like `Reader`, an interface for I/O that requires just a `read` method. After a while, if you realize a more complete protocol is required, you can combine two or more protocols to define a new one.

Using a container that picks items at random may or may not require reloading the container, but it certainly needs a method to do the actual pick, so that’s the method I will choose for the minimal `RandomPicker` protocol. The code for that protocol is in [Example 13-18](#ex_randompick_protocol), and its use is demonstrated by tests in [Example 13-19](#ex_randompick_protocol_demo).

##### Example 13-18. _randompick.py_: definition of `RandomPicker`

```
from
```

###### Note

The `pick` method returns `Any`. In [“Implementing a Generic Static Protocol”](ch15.html#implementing_generic_static_proto_sec), we will see how to make `RandomPicker` a generic type with a parameter to let users of the protocol specify the return type of the `pick` method.

##### Example 13-19. _randompick_test.py_: `RandomPicker` in use

```
import
```

[![^1]

It’s not necessary to import the static protocol to define a class that implements it. Here I imported `RandomPicker` only to use it on `test_isinstance` later.

[![^2]

`SimplePicker` implements `RandomPicker`—but it does not subclass it. This is static duck typing in action.

[![^3]

`Any` is the default return type, so this annotation is not strictly necessary, but it does make it more clear that we are implementing the `RandomPicker` protocol as defined in [Example 13-18](#ex_randompick_protocol).

[![^4]

Don’t forget to add `-> None` hints to your tests if you want Mypy to look at them.

[![^5]

I added a type hint for the `popper` variable to show that Mypy understands that `SimplePicker` is _consistent-with_.

[![^6]

This test proves that an instance of `SimplePicker` is also an instance of `RandomPicker`. This works because of the `@runtime_checkable` decorator applied to `RandomPicker`, and because `SimplePicker` has a `pick` method as required.

[![^7]

This test invokes the `pick` method from a `SimplePicker`, verifies that it returns one of the items given to `SimplePicker`, and then does static and runtime checks on the returned item.

[![^8]

This line generates a note in the Mypy output.

As we saw in [Example 8-22](ch08.html#top_protocol_test), `reveal_type` is a “magic” function recognized by Mypy. That’s why it is not imported and we can only call it inside `if` blocks protected by `typing.TYPE_CHECKING`, which is only `True` in the eyes of a static type checker, but is `False` at runtime.

Both tests in [Example 13-19](#ex_randompick_protocol_demo) pass. Mypy does not see any errors in that code either, and shows the result of the `reveal_type` on the `item` returned by `pick`:

$ mypy randompick_test.py
randompick_test.py:24: note: Revealed `type` is `'Any'`

Having created our first protocol, let’s study some advice on the matter.