## Supporting a Static Protocol

Recall the `Vector2d` class we built in [Chapter 11](ch11.html#pythonic_objects). Given that a `complex` number and a `Vector2d` instance both consist of a pair of floats, it makes sense to support conversion from `Vector2d` to `complex`.

[Example 13-16](#ex_vector2d_complex_v4) shows the implementation of the `__complex__` method to enhance the last version of `Vector2d` we saw in [Example 11-11](ch11.html#ex_vector2d_v3_full). For completeness, we can support the inverse operation with a `fromcomplex` class method to build a `Vector2d` from a `complex`.

##### Example 13-16. _vector2d_v4.py_: methods for converting to and from `complex`

```
    
```

[![^1]

This assumes that `datum` has `.real` and `.imag` attributes. We’ll see a better implementation in [Example 13-17](#ex_vector2d_complex_v5).

Given the preceding code, and the `__abs__` method the `Vector2d` already had in [Example 11-11](ch11.html#ex_vector2d_v3_full), we get these features:

```
>>> 
```

For runtime type checking, [Example 13-16](#ex_vector2d_complex_v4) is fine, but for better static coverage and error reporting with Mypy, the `__abs__`, `__complex__`, and `fromcomplex` methods should get type hints, as shown in [Example 13-17](#ex_vector2d_complex_v5).

##### Example 13-17. _vector2d_v5.py_: adding annotations to the methods under study

```
    
```

[![^1]

The `float` return annotation is needed, otherwise Mypy infers `Any`, and doesn’t check the body of the method.

[![^2]

Even without the annotation, Mypy was able to infer that this returns a `complex`. The annotation prevents a warning, depending on your Mypy configuration.

[![^3]

Here `SupportsComplex` ensures the `datum` is convertible.

[![^4]

This explicit conversion is necessary, because the `SupportsComplex` type does not declare `.real` and `.imag` attributes, used in the next line. For example, `Vector2d` doesn’t have those attributes, but implements `__complex__`.

The return type of `fromcomplex` can be `Vector2d` if `from __future__ import annotations` appears at the top of the module. That import causes type hints to be stored as strings, without being evaluated at import time, when function definitions are evaluated. Without the `__future__` import of `annotations`, `Vector2d` is an invalid reference at this point (the class is not fully defined yet) and should be written as a string: `'Vector2d'`, as if it were a forward reference. This `__future__` import was introduced in [PEP 563—Postponed Evaluation of Annotations](https://fpy.li/pep563), implemented in Python 3.7. That behavior was scheduled to become default in 3.10, but the change was delayed to a later version.[^20] When that happens, the import will be redundant, but harmless.

Next, let’s see how to create—and later, extend—a new static protocol.