## Exploring JSON-Like Data with Dynamic Attributes

[Example 22-2](#ex_osconfeed_explore) is simple enough, but the syntax `feed['Schedule']['events'][40]['name']` is cumbersome. In JavaScript, you can get the same value by writing `feed.Schedule.events[40].name`. It’s easy to implement a `dict`-like class that does the same in Python—there are plenty of implementations on the web.[^4] I wrote `FrozenJSON`, which is simpler than most recipes because it supports reading only: it’s just for exploring the data. `FrozenJSON` is also recursive, dealing automatically with nested mappings and lists.

[Example 22-3](#ex_explore0_demo) is a demonstration of `FrozenJSON`, and the source code is shown in [Example 22-4](#ex_explore0).

##### Example 22-3. `FrozenJSON` from [Example 22-4](#ex_explore0) allows reading attributes like `name`, and calling methods like `.keys()` and `.items()`

```
    
```

[![^1]

Build a `FrozenJSON` instance from the `raw_feed` made of nested dicts and lists.

[![^2]

`FrozenJSON` allows traversing nested dicts by using attribute notation; here we show the length of the list of speakers.

[![^3]

Methods of the underlying dicts can also be accessed, like `.keys()`, to retrieve the record collection names.

[![^4]

Using `items()`, we can retrieve the record collection names and their contents, to display the `len()` of each of them.

[![^5]

A `list`, such as `feed.Schedule.speakers`, remains a list, but the items inside are converted to `FrozenJSON` if they are mappings.

[![^6]

Item 40 in the `events` list was a JSON object; now it’s a `FrozenJSON` instance.

[![^7]

Event records have a `speakers` list with speaker serial numbers.

[![^8]

Trying to read a missing attribute raises `KeyError`, instead of the usual `AttributeError`.

The keystone of the `FrozenJSON` class is the `__getattr__` method, which we already used in the `Vector` example in [“Vector Take #3: Dynamic Attribute Access”](ch12.html#vector_dynamic_attrs_sec), to retrieve `Vector` components by letter: `v.x`, `v.y`, `v.z`, etc. It’s essential to recall that the `__getattr__` special method is only invoked by the interpreter when the usual process fails to retrieve an attribute (i.e., when the named attribute cannot be found in the instance, nor in the class or in its superclasses).

The last line of [Example 22-3](#ex_explore0_demo) exposes a minor issue with my code: trying to read a missing attribute should raise `AttributeError`, and not `KeyError` as shown. When I implemented the error handling to do that, the `__getattr__` method became twice as long, distracting from the most important logic I wanted to show. Given that users would know that a `FrozenJSON` is built from mappings and lists, I think the `KeyError` is not too confusing.

##### Example 22-4. explore0.py: turn a JSON dataset into a `FrozenJSON` holding nested `FrozenJSON` objects, lists, and simple types

```
from
```

[![^1]

Build a `dict` from the `mapping` argument. This ensures we get a mapping or something that can be converted to one. The double-underscore prefix on `__data` makes it a _private attribute_.

[![^2]

`__getattr__` is called only when there’s no attribute with that `name`.

[![^3]

If `name` matches an attribute of the instance `__data` `dict`, return that. This is how calls like `feed.keys()` are handled: the `keys` method is an attribute of the `__data` `dict`.

[![^4]

Otherwise, fetch the item with the key `name` from `self.__data`, and return the result of calling `FrozenJSON.build()` on that.[^5]

[![^5]

Implementing `__dir__` suports the `dir()` built-in, which in turns supports auto-completion in the standard Python console as well as IPython, Jupyter Notebook, etc. This simple code will enable recursive auto-completion based on the keys in `self.__data`, because `__getattr__` builds `FrozenJSON` instances on the fly—useful for interactive exploration of the data.

[![^6]

This is an alternate constructor, a common use for the `@classmethod` decorator.

[![^7]

If `obj` is a mapping, build a `FrozenJSON` with it. This is an example of _goose typing_—see [“Goose Typing”](ch13.html#goose_typing_sec) if you need a refresher.

[![^8]

If it is a `MutableSequence`, it must be a list,[^6]`.

[![^9]

If it’s not a `dict` or a `list`, return the item as it is.

A `FrozenJSON` instance has the `__data` private instance attribute stored under the name `_FrozenJSON__data`, as explained in [“Private and ‘Protected’ Attributes in Python”](ch11.html#private_protected_sec). Attempts to retrieve attributes by other names will trigger `__getattr__`. This method will first look if the `self.__data` `dict` has an attribute (not a key!) by that name; this allows `FrozenJSON` instances to handle `dict` methods such as `items`, by delegating to `self.__data.items()`. If `self.__data` doesn’t have an attribute with the given `name`, `__getattr__` uses `name` as a key to retrieve an item from `self.__data`, and passes that item to `FrozenJSON.build`. This allows navigating through nested structures in the JSON data, as each nested mapping is converted to another `FrozenJSON` instance by the `build` class method.

Note that `FrozenJSON` does not transform or cache the original dataset. As we traverse the data, `__getattr__` creates `FrozenJSON` instances again and again. That’s OK for a dataset of this size, and for a script that will only be used to explore or convert the data.

Any script that generates or emulates dynamic attribute names from arbitrary sources must deal with one issue: the keys in the original data may not be suitable attribute names. The next section addresses this.