## Special Methods for Attribute Handling

When implemented in a user-defined class, the special methods listed here handle attribute retrieval, setting, deletion, and listing.

Attribute access using either dot notation or the built-in functions `getattr`, `hasattr`, and `setattr` triggers the appropriate special methods listed here. Reading and writing attributes directly in the instance `__dict__` does not trigger these special methods—and that’s the usual way to bypass them if needed.

Section [“3.3.11. Special method lookup”](https://fpy.li/22-21) of the “Data model” chapter warns:

> For custom classes, implicit invocations of special methods are only guaranteed to work correctly if defined on an object’s type, not in the object’s instance dictionary.

In other words, assume that the special methods will be retrieved on the class itself, even when the target of the action is an instance. For this reason, special methods are not shadowed by instance attributes with the same name.

In the following examples, assume there is a class named `Class`, `obj` is an instance of `Class`, and `attr` is an attribute of `obj`.

For every one of these special methods, it doesn’t matter if the attribute access is done using dot notation or one of the built-in functions listed in [“Built-In Functions for Attribute Handling”](#bif_attribute_handling). For example, both `obj.attr` and `getattr(obj, 'attr', 42)` trigger `Class.__getattribute__(obj, 'attr')`.

`__delattr__(self, name)`

Always called when there is an attempt to delete an attribute using the `del` statement; e.g., `del obj.attr` triggers `Class.__delattr__(obj, 'attr')`. If `attr` is a property, its deleter method is never called if the class implements `__delattr__`.

`__dir__(self)`

Called when `dir` is invoked on the object, to provide a listing of attributes; e.g., `dir(obj)` triggers `Class.__dir__(obj)`. Also used by tab-completion in all modern Python consoles.

`__getattr__(self, name)`

Called only when an attempt to retrieve the named attribute fails, after the `obj`, `Class`, and its superclasses are searched. The expressions `obj.no_such_attr`, `getattr(obj, 'no_such_attr')`, and `hasattr(obj, 'no_such_attr')` may trigger `Class.__getattr__(obj, 'no_such_attr')`, but only if an attribute by that name cannot be found in `obj` or in `Class` and its superclasses.

`__getattribute__(self, name)`

Always called when there is an attempt to retrieve the named attribute directly from Python code (the interpreter may bypass this in some cases, for example, to get the `__repr__` method). Dot notation and the `getattr` and `hasattr` built-ins trigger this method. `__getattr__` is only invoked after `__getattribute__`, and only when `__getattribute__` raises `AttributeError`. To retrieve attributes of the instance `obj` without triggering an infinite recursion, implementations of `__getattribute__` should use `super().__getattribute__(obj, name)`.

`__setattr__(self, name, value)`

Always called when there is an attempt to set the named attribute. Dot notation and the `setattr` built-in trigger this method; e.g., both `obj.attr = 42` and `setattr(obj, 'attr', 42)` trigger `Class.__setattr__(obj, 'attr', 42)`.

###### Warning

In practice, because they are unconditionally called and affect practically every attribute access, the `__getattribute__` and `__setattr__` special methods are harder to use correctly than `__getattr__`, which only handles nonexisting attribute names. Using properties or descriptors is less error prone than defining these special methods.

This concludes our dive into properties, special methods, and other techniques for coding dynamic attributes.