## Built-In Functions for Attribute Handling

These five built-in functions perform object attribute reading, writing, and introspection:

`dir([object])`

Lists most attributes of the object. The [official docs](https://fpy.li/22-18) say `dir` is intended for interactive use so it does not provide a comprehensive list of attributes, but an “interesting” set of names. `dir` can inspect objects implemented with or without a `__dict__`. The `__dict__` attribute itself is not listed by `dir`, but the `__dict__` keys are listed. Several special attributes of classes, such as `__mro__`, `__bases__`, and `__name__`, are not listed by `dir` either. You can customize the output of `dir` by implementing the `__dir__` special method, as we saw in [Example 22-4](#ex_explore0). If the optional `object` argument is not given, `dir` lists the names in the current scope.

`getattr(object, name[, default])`

Gets the attribute identified by the `name` string from the `object`. The main use case is to retrieve attributes (or methods) whose names we don’t know beforehand. This may fetch an attribute from the object’s class or from a superclass. If no such attribute exists, `getattr` raises `AttributeError` or returns the `default` value, if given. One great example of using `gettatr` is in the [`Cmd.onecmd` method](https://fpy.li/22-19) in the `cmd` package of the standard library, where it is used to get and execute a user-defined command.

`hasattr(object, name)`

Returns `True` if the named attribute exists in the `object`, or can be somehow fetched through it (by inheritance, for example). The [documentation](https://fpy.li/22-20) explains: “This is implemented by calling getattr(object, name) and seeing whether it raises an AttributeError or not.”

`setattr(object, name, value)`

Assigns the `value` to the named attribute of `object`, if the `object` allows it. This may create a new attribute or overwrite an existing one.

`vars([object])`

Returns the `__dict__` of `object`; `vars` can’t deal with instances of classes that define `__slots__` and don’t have a `__dict__` (contrast with `dir`, which handles such instances). Without an argument, `vars()` does the same as `locals()`: returns a `dict` representing the local scope.