# Experimenting with Executor.map

Let’s investigate `Executor.map`, now using a `ThreadPoolExecutor` with three workers running five callables that output timestamped messages. The code is in [Example 20-8](#demo_executor_map_ex), the output in [Example 20-9](#demo_executor_map_run).

##### Example 20-8. demo_executor_map.py: Simple demonstration of the map method of `ThreadPoolExecutor`

```
from
```

[![^1]

This function simply prints whatever arguments it gets, preceded by a timestamp in the format `[HH:MM:SS]`.

[![^2]

`loiter` does nothing except display a message when it starts, sleep for `n` seconds, then display a message when it ends; tabs are used to indent the messages according to the value of `n`.

[![^3]

`loiter` returns `n * 10` so we can see how to collect results.

[![^4]

Create a `ThreadPoolExecutor` with three threads.

[![^5]

Submit five tasks to the `executor`. Since there are only three threads, only three of those tasks will start immediately: the calls `loiter(0)`, `loiter(1)`, and `loiter(2)`; this is a nonblocking call.

[![^6]

Immediately display the `results` of invoking `executor.map`: it’s a generator, as the output in [Example 20-9](#demo_executor_map_run) shows.

[![^7]

The `enumerate` call in the `for` loop will implicitly invoke `next(results)`, which in turn will invoke `_f.result()` on the (internal) `_f` future representing the first call, `loiter(0)`. The `result` method will block until the future is done, therefore each iteration in this loop will have to wait for the next result to be ready.

I encourage you to run [Example 20-8](#demo_executor_map_ex) and see the display being updated incrementally. While you’re at it, play with the `max_workers` argument for the `ThreadPool​Executor` and with the `range` function that produces the arguments for the `executor.map` call—or replace it with lists of handpicked values to create different delays.

[Example 20-9](#demo_executor_map_run) shows a sample run of [Example 20-8](#demo_executor_map_ex).

##### Example 20-9. Sample run of demo_executor_map.py from [Example 20-8](#demo_executor_map_ex)

```
$ python3 demo_executor_map.py
[15:56:50] Script starting.  
```

[![^1]

This run started at 15:56:50.

[![^2]

The first thread executes `loiter(0)`, so it will sleep for 0s and return even before the second thread has a chance to start, but YMMV.[^6]

[![^3]

`loiter(1)` and `loiter(2)` start immediately (because the thread pool has three workers, it can run three functions concurrently).

[![^4]

This shows that the `results` returned by `executor.map` is a generator; nothing so far would block, regardless of the number of tasks and the `max_workers` setting.

[![^5]

Because `loiter(0)` is done, the first worker is now available to start the fourth thread for `loiter(3)`.

[![^6]

This is where execution may block, depending on the parameters given to the `loiter` calls: the `__next__` method of the `results` generator must wait until the first future is complete. In this case, it won’t block because the call to `loiter(0)` finished before this loop started. Note that everything up to this point happened within the same second: 15:56:50.

[![^7]

`loiter(1)` is done one second later, at 15:56:51. The thread is freed to start `loiter(4)`.

[![^8]

The result of `loiter(1)` is shown: `10`. Now the `for` loop will block waiting for the result of `loiter(2)`.

[![^9]

The pattern repeats: `loiter(2)` is done, its result is shown; same with `loiter(3)`.

[![^10]

There is a 2s delay until `loiter(4)` is done, because it started at 15:56:51 and did nothing for 4s.

The `Executor.map` function is easy to use, but often it’s preferable to get the results as they are ready, regardless of the order they were submitted. To do that, we need a combination of the `Executor.submit` method and the `futures.as_completed` function, as we saw in [Example 20-4](#flags_threadpool_futures_ex). We’ll come back to this technique in [“Using futures.as_completed”](#using_futures_as_completed_sec).

###### Tip

The combination of `executor.submit` and `futures.as_completed` is more flexible than `executor.map` because you can `submit` different callables and arguments, while `executor.map` is designed to run the same callable on the different arguments. In addition, the set of futures you pass to `futures.as_completed` may come from more than one executor—perhaps some were created by a `ThreadPoolExecutor` instance, while others are from a `ProcessPoolExecutor`.

In the next section, we will resume the flag download examples with new requirements that will force us to iterate over the results of `futures.as_completed` instead of using `executor.map`.