## How It Works

Remember that this code:

```
@clock
```

actually does this:

```
def
```

So, in both examples, `clock` gets the `factorial` function as its `func` argument (see [Example 9-14](#ex_clockdeco0)). It then creates and returns the `clocked` function, which the Python interpreter assigns to `factorial` (behind the scenes, in the first example). In fact, if you import the `clockdeco_demo` module and check the `__name__` of `factorial`, this is what you get:

```
>>> 
```

So `factorial` now actually holds a reference to the `clocked` function. From now on, each time `factorial(n)` is called, `clocked(n)` gets executed. In essence, `clocked` does the following:

1. Records the initial time `t0`.
    
2. Calls the original `factorial` function, saving the result.
    
3. Computes the elapsed time.
    
4. Formats and displays the collected data.
    
5. Returns the result saved in step 2.
    

This is the typical behavior of a decorator: it replaces the decorated function with a new function that accepts the same arguments and (usually) returns whatever the decorated function was supposed to return, while also doing some extra processing.

###### Tip

In _Design Patterns_ by Gamma et al., the short description of the decorator pattern starts with: “Attach additional responsibilities to an object dynamically.” Function decorators fit that description. But at the implementation level, Python decorators bear little resemblance to the classic decorator described in the original _Design Patterns_ work. [“Soapbox”](#closures_soapbox) has more on this subject.

The `clock` decorator implemented in [Example 9-14](#ex_clockdeco0) has a few shortcomings: it does not support keyword arguments, and it masks the `__name__` and `__doc__` of the decorated function. [Example 9-16](#ex_clockdeco2) uses the `functools.wraps` decorator to copy the relevant attributes from `func` to `clocked`. Also, in this new version, keyword arguments are correctly handled.

##### Example 9-16. _clockdeco.py_: an improved clock decorator

```
import
```

`functools.wraps` is just one of the ready-to-use decorators in the standard library. In the next section, we’ll meet the most impressive decorator that `functools` provides: `cache`.