# Chapter 21. Asynchronous Programming

> The problem with normal approaches to asynchronous programming is that they’re all-or-nothing propositions. You rewrite all your code so none of it blocks or you’re just wasting your time.
> 
> Alvaro Videla and Jason J. W. Williams, _RabbitMQ in Action_[^1]

This chapter addresses three major topics that are closely related:

- Python’s `async def`, `await`, `async with`, and `async for` constructs
    
- Objects supporting those constructs: native coroutines and asynchronous variants of context managers, iterables, generators, and comprehensions
    
- _asyncio_ and other asynchronous libraries
    

This chapter builds on the ideas of iterables and generators ([Chapter 17](ch17.html#iterables2generators), in particular [“Classic Coroutines”](ch17.html#classic_coroutines_sec)), context managers ([Chapter 18](ch18.html#with_match_ch)), and general concepts of concurrent programming ([Chapter 19](ch19.html#concurrency_models_ch)).

We’ll study concurrent HTTP clients similar to the ones we saw in [Chapter 20](ch20.html#futures_ch), rewritten with native coroutines and asynchronous context managers, using the same _HTTPX_ library as before, but now through its asynchronous API. We’ll also see how to avoid blocking the event loop by delegating slow operations to a thread or process executor.

After the HTTP client examples, we’ll see two simple asynchronous server-side applications, one of them using the increasingly popular _FastAPI_ framework. Then we’ll cover other language constructs enabled by the `async/await` keywords: asynchronous generator functions, asynchronous comprehensions, and asynchronous generator expressions. To emphasize the fact that those language features are not tied to _asyncio_, we’ll see one example rewritten to use _Curio_—the elegant and innovative asynchronous framework invented by David Beazley.

To wrap up the chapter, I wrote a brief section on the advantages and pitfalls of asynchronous programming.

That’s a lot of ground to cover. We only have space for basic examples, but they will illustrate the most important features of each idea.

###### Tip

The [_asyncio_ documentation](https://fpy.li/21-1) is much better after Yury Selivanov[^2] reorganized it, separating the few functions useful to application developers from the low-level API for creators of packages like web frameworks and database drivers.

For book-length coverage of _asyncio_, I recommend [_Using Asyncio in Python_](https://fpy.li/hattingh) by Caleb Hattingh (O’Reilly). Full disclosure: Caleb is one of the tech reviewers of this book.