# Chapter Summary

> The problem with normal approaches to asynchronous programming is that they’re all-or-nothing propositions. You rewrite all your code so none of it blocks or you’re just wasting your time.
> 
> Alvaro Videla and Jason J. W. Williams, _RabbitMQ in Action_

I chose that epigraph for this chapter for two reasons. At a high level, it reminds us to avoid blocking the event loop by delegating slow tasks to a different processing unit, from a simple thread all the way to a distributed task queue. At a lower level, it is also a warning: once you write your first `async def`, your program is inevitably going to have more and more `async def`, `await`, `async with`, and `async for`. And using non-asynchronous libraries suddenly becomes a challenge.

After the simple _spinner_ examples in [Chapter 19](ch19.html#concurrency_models_ch), here our main focus was asynchronous programming with native coroutines, starting with the _blogdom.py_ DNS probing example, followed by the concept of _awaitables_. While reading the source code of _flags_asyncio.py_, we found the first example of an _asynchronous context manager_.

The more advanced variations of the flag downloading program introduced two powerful functions: the `asyncio.as_completed` generator and the `loop.run_in_executor` coroutine. We also saw the concept and application of a semaphore to limit the number of concurrent downloads—as expected from well-behaved HTTP clients.

Server-side asynchronous programming was presented through the _mojifinder_ examples: a _FastAPI_ web service and _tcp_mojifinder.py_—the latter using just `asyncio` and the TCP protocol.

Asynchronous iteration and asynchronous iterables were the next major topic, with sections on `async for`, Python’s async console, asynchronous generators, asynchronous generator expressions, and asynchronous comprehensions.

The last example in the chapter was _blogdom.py_ rewritten with the _Curio_ framework, to demonstrate how Python’s asynchronous features are not tied to the `asyncio` package. _Curio_ also showcases the concept of _structured concurrency_, which may have an industry-wide impact, bringing more clarity to concurrent code.

Finally, the sections under [“How Async Works and How It Doesn’t”](#how_async_works_and_does_not_sec) discuss the main appeal of asynchronous programming, the misconception of “I/O-bound systems,” and dealing with the inevitable CPU-bound parts of your program.