# Type Hinting Asynchronous Objects

The return type of a native coroutine describes what you get when you `await` on that coroutine, which is the type of the object that appears in the `return` statements in the body of the native coroutine function.[^18]

This chapter provided many examples of annotated native coroutines, including `probe` from [Example 21-21](#blogdom_curio_ex):

```
async
```

If you need to annotate a parameter that takes a coroutine object, then the generic type is:

```
class
```

That type, and the following types were introduced in Python 3.5 and 3.6 to annotate asynchronous objects:

```
class
```

With Python ≥ 3.9, use the `collections.abc` equivalents of these.

I want to highlight three aspects of those generic types.

First: they are all covariant on the first type parameter, which is the type of the items yielded from these objects. Recall rule #1 of [“Variance rules of thumb”](ch15.html#variance_rules_sec):

> If a formal type parameter defines a type for data that comes out of the object, it can be covariant.

Second: `AsyncGenerator` and `Coroutine` are contravariant on the second to last parameter. That’s the type of the argument of the low-level `.send()` method that the event loop calls to drive asynchronous generators and coroutines. As such, it is an “input” type. Therefore, it can be contravariant, per Variance Rule of Thumb #2:

> If a formal type parameter defines a type for data that goes into the object after its initial construction, it can be contravariant.

Third: `AsyncGenerator` has no return type, in contrast with `typing.Generator`, which we saw in [“Generic Type Hints for Classic Coroutines”](ch17.html#generic_classic_coroutine_types_sec). Returning a value by raising `StopIteration(value)` was one of the hacks that enabled generators to operate as coroutines and support `yield from`, as we saw in [“Classic Coroutines”](ch17.html#classic_coroutines_sec). There is no such overlap among the asynchronous objects: `AsyncGenerator` objects don’t return values, and are completely separate from native coroutine objects, which are annotated with `typing.Coroutine`.

Finally, let’s briefly discuss the advantages and challenges of asynchronous programming.