# async Beyond asyncio: Curio

Python’s `async/await` language constructs are not tied to any specific event loop or library.[^17] Thanks to the extensible API provided by special methods, anyone sufficiently motivated can write their own asynchronous runtime environment and framework to drive native coroutines, asynchronous generators, etc.

That’s what David Beazley did in his [_Curio_](https://fpy.li/21-49) project. He was interested in rethinking how these new language features could be used in a framework built from scratch. Recall that `asyncio` was released in Python 3.4, and it used `yield from` instead of `await`, so its API could not leverage asynchronous context managers, asynchronous iterators, and everything else that the `async/await` keywords made possible. As a result, _Curio_ has a cleaner API and a simpler implementation, compared to `asyncio`.

[Example 21-21](#blogdom_curio_ex) shows the _blogdom.py_ script ([Example 21-1](#blogdom_ex)) rewritten to use _Curio_.

##### Example 21-21. blogdom.py: [Example 21-1](#blogdom_ex), now using _Curio_

```
#!/usr/bin/env python3
```

[![^1]

`probe` doesn’t need to get the event loop, because…

[![^2]

…`getaddrinfo` is a top-level function of `curio.socket`, not a method of a `loop` object—as it is in `asyncio`.

[![^3]

A `TaskGroup` is a core concept in _Curio_, to monitor and control several coroutines, and to make sure they are all executed and cleaned up.

[![^4]

`TaskGroup.spawn` is how you start a coroutine, managed by a specific `TaskGroup` instance. The coroutine is wrapped by a `Task`.

[![^5]

Iterating with `async for` over a `TaskGroup` yields `Task` instances as each is completed. This corresponds to the line in [Example 21-1](#blogdom_ex) using `for … as_completed(…):`.

[![^6]

_Curio_ pioneered this sensible way to start an asynchronous program in Python.

To expand on the last point: if you look at the `asyncio` code examples for the first edition of _Fluent Python_, you’ll see lines like these, repeated over and over:

    `loop` `=` `asyncio``.``get_event_loop``()`
    `loop``.``run_until_complete``(``main``())`
    `loop``.``close``()`

A _Curio_ `TaskGroup` is an asynchronous context manager that replaces several ad hoc APIs and coding patterns in `asyncio`. We just saw how iterating over a `TaskGroup` makes the `asyncio.as_completed(…)` function unnecessary. Another example: instead of a special `gather` function, this snippet from the [“Task Groups” docs](https://fpy.li/21-50) collects the results of all tasks in the group:

```
async
```

Task groups support [_structured concurrency_](https://fpy.li/21-51): a form of concurrent programming that constrains all the activity of a group of asynchronous tasks to a single entry and exit point. This is analogous to structured programming, which eschewed the `GOTO` command and introduced block statements to limit the entry and exit points of loops and subroutines. When used as an asynchronous context manager, a `TaskGroup` ensures that all tasks spawned inside are completed or cancelled, and any exceptions raised, upon exiting the enclosed block.

###### Note

Structured concurrency will probably be adopted by `asyncio` in upcoming Python releases. A strong indication appears in [PEP 654–Exception Groups and except*](https://fpy.li/pep654), which was [approved for Python 3.11](https://fpy.li/21-52). The [“Motivation” section](https://fpy.li/21-53) mentions _Trio’s_ “nurseries,” their name for task groups: “Implementing a better task spawning API in _asyncio_, inspired by Trio nurseries, was the main motivation for this PEP.”

Another important feature of _Curio_ is better support for programming with coroutines and threads in the same codebase—a necessity in most nontrivial asynchronous programs. Starting a thread with `await spawn_thread(func, …)` returns an `AsyncThread` object with a `Task`-like interface. Threads can call coroutines thanks to a special [`AWAIT(coro)`](https://fpy.li/21-54) function—named in all caps because `await` is now a keyword.

_Curio_ also provides a `UniversalQueue` that can be used to coordinate the work among threads, _Curio_ coroutines, and `asyncio` coroutines. That’s right, _Curio_ has features that allow it to run in a thread along with `asyncio` in another thread, in the same process, communicating via `UniversalQueue` and `UniversalEvent`. The API for these “universal” classes is the same inside and outside of coroutines, but in a coroutine, you need to prefix calls with `await`.

As I write this in October 2021, _HTTPX_ is the first HTTP client library [compatible with _Curio_](https://fpy.li/21-55), but I don’t know of any asynchronous database libraries that support it yet. In the _Curio_ repository there is an impressive set of [network programming examples](https://fpy.li/21-56), including one using _WebSocket_, and another implementing the [RFC 8305—Happy Eyeballs](https://fpy.li/21-57) concurrent algorithm for connecting to IPv6 endpoints with fast fallback to IPv4 if needed.

The design of _Curio_ has been influential. The [_Trio_](https://fpy.li/21-58) framework started by Nathaniel J. Smith was heavily inspired by _Curio_. _Curio_ may also have prompted Python contributors to improve the usability of the `asyncio` API. For example, in its earliest releases, `asyncio` users very often had to get and pass around a `loop` object because some essential functions were either `loop` methods or required a `loop` argument. In recent versions of Python, direct access to the loop is not needed as often, and in fact several functions that accepted an optional `loop` are now deprecating that argument.

Type annotations for asynchronous types are our next topic.