# New Concept: Awaitable

The `for` keyword works with _iterables_. The `await` keyword works with _awaitables_.

As an end user of _asyncio_, these are the awaitables you will see on a daily basis:

- A _native coroutine object_, which you get by calling a _native coroutine function_
    
- An `asyncio.Task`, which you usually get by passing a coroutine object to `asyncio.create_task()`
    

However, end-user code does not always need to `await` on a `Task`. We use `asyncio.create_task(one_coro())` to schedule `one_coro` for concurrent execution, without waiting for its return. That’s what we did with the `spinner` coroutine in _spinner_async.py_ ([Example 19-4](ch19.html#spinner_async_start_ex)). If you don’t expect to cancel the task or wait for it, there is no need to keep the `Task` object returned from `create_task`. Creating the task is enough to schedule the coroutine to run.

In contrast, we use `await other_coro()` to run `other_coro` right now and wait for its completion because we need its result before we can proceed. In _spinner_async.py_, the `supervisor` coroutine did `res = await slow()` to execute `slow` and get its result.

When implementing asynchronous libraries or contributing to _asyncio_ itself, you may also deal with these lower-level awaitables:

- An object with an `__await__` method that returns an iterator; for example, an `asyncio.Future` instance (`asyncio.Task` is a subclass of `asyncio.Future`)
    
- Objects written in other languages using the Python/C API with a `tp_as_async.am_await` function, returning an iterator (similar to `__await__` method)
    

Existing codebases may also have one additional kind of awaitable: _generator-based coroutine objects_—which are in the process of being deprecated.

###### Note

PEP 492 [states](https://fpy.li/21-7) that the `await` expression “uses the `yield from` implementation with an extra step of validating its argument” and “`await` only accepts an awaitable.” The PEP does not explain that implementation in detail, but refers to [PEP 380](https://fpy.li/pep380), which introduced `yield from`. I posted a detailed explanation in [“Classic Coroutines”](https://fpy.li/oldcoro), section [“The Meaning of yield from”](https://fpy.li/21-8), at [_fluentpython.com_](http://fluentpython.com).

Now let’s study the _asyncio_ version of a script that downloads a fixed set of flag 0-Assets/Epubook/Fluent%20Python%20Clear,%20Concise,%20and%20Effective%20Programming/images.