# A Metaclass Hack with __prepare__

When I updated this chapter for the second edition, I needed to find simple but illuminating examples to replace the _bulkfood_ `LineItem` code that no longer require metaclasses since Python 3.6.

The simplest and most interesting metaclass idea was given to me by João S. O. Bueno—better known as JS in the Brazilian Python community. One application of his idea is to create a class that autogenerates numeric constants:

    `>>>` `class` `Flavor``(``AutoConst``):`
    `...`     `banana`
    `...`     `coconut`
    `...`     `vanilla`
    `...`
    `>>>` `Flavor``.``vanilla`
    `2`
    `>>>` `Flavor``.``banana``,` `Flavor``.``coconut`
    `(``0``,` `1``)`

Yes, that code works as shown! That’s actually a doctest in _autoconst_demo.py_.

Here is the user-friendly `AutoConst` base class and the metaclass behind it, implemented in _autoconst.py_:

```
class
```

That’s it.

Clearly the trick is in `WilyDict`.

When Python processes the namespace of the user’s class and reads `banana`, it looks up that name in the mapping provided by `__prepare__`: an instance of `WilyDict`. `WilyDict` implements `__missing__`, covered in [“The __missing__ Method”](ch03.html#missing_method). The `WilyDict` instance initially has no `'banana'` key, so the `__missing__` method is triggered. It makes an item on the fly with the key `'banana'` and the value `0`, returning that value. Python is happy with that, then tries to retrieve `'coconut'`. `WilyDict` promptly adds that entry with the value `1`, returning it. The same happens with `'vanilla'`, which is then mapped to `2`.

We’ve seen `__prepare__` and `__missing__` before. The real innovation is how JS put them together.

Here is the source code for `WilyDict`, also from _autoconst.py_:

```
class
```

While experimenting, I found that Python looked up `__name__` in the namespace of the class under construction, causing `WilyDict` to add a `__name__` entry, and increment `__next_value`. So I added that `if` statement in `__missing__` to raise `KeyError` for keys that look like dunder attributes.

The _autoconst.py_ package both requires and illustrates mastery of Python’s dynamic class building machinery.

I had a great time adding more functionality to `AutoConstMeta` and `AutoConst`, but instead of sharing my experiments, I will let you have fun playing with JS’s ingenious hack.

Here are some ideas:

- Make it possible to retrieve the constant name if you have the value. For example, `Flavor[2]` could return `'vanilla'`. You can to this by implementing `__getitem__` in `AutoConstMeta`. Since Python 3.9, you can implement [`__class_getitem__`](https://fpy.li/24-16) in `AutoConst` itself.
    
- Support iteration over the class, by implementing `__iter__` on the metaclass. I would make the `__iter__` yield the constants as `(name, value)` pairs.
    
- Implement a new `Enum` variant. This would be a major undertaking, because the `enum` package is full of tricks, including the `EnumMeta` metaclass with hundreds of lines of code and a nontrivial `__prepare__` method.
    

Enjoy!

###### Note

The `__class_getitem__` special method was added in Python 3.9 to support generic types, as part of [PEP 585—Type Hinting Generics In Standard Collections](https://fpy.li/pep585). Thanks to `__class_getitem__`, Python’s core developers did not have to write a new metaclass for the built-in types to implement `__getitem__` so that we could write generic type hints like `list[int]`. This is a narrow feature, but representative of a wider use case for metaclasses: implementing operators and other special methods to work at the class level, such as making the class itself iterable, just like `Enum` subclasses.