# Further Reading

Caleb Hattingh—a technical reviewer of this book—wrote the [_autoslot_](https://fpy.li/24-20) package, providing a metaclass to automatically create a `__slots__` attribute in a user-defined class by inspecting the bytecode of `__init__` and finding all assignments to attributes of `self`. It’s useful and also an excellent example to study: only 74 lines of code in _autoslot.py_, including 20 lines of comments explaining the most difficult parts.

The essential references for this chapter in the Python documentation are [“3.3.3. Customizing class creation”](https://fpy.li/24-21) in the “Data Model” chapter of _The Python Language Reference_, which covers `__init_subclass__` and metaclasses. The [`type` class documentation](https://fpy.li/24-22) in the “Built-in Functions” page, and [“4.13. Special Attributes”](https://fpy.li/24-1) of the “Built-in Types” chapter in the _The Python Standard Library_ are also essential reading.

In the _The Python Standard Library_, the [`types` module documentation](https://fpy.li/24-24) covers two functions added in Python 3.3 that simplify class metaprogramming: `types.new_class` and `types.prepare_class`.

Class decorators were formalized in [PEP 3129—Class Decorators](https://fpy.li/24-25), written by Collin Winter, with the reference implementation authored by Jack Diederich. The PyCon 2009 talk “Class Decorators: Radically Simple” ([video](https://fpy.li/24-26)), also by Jack Diederich, is a quick introduction to the feature. Besides `@dataclass`, an interesting—and much simpler—example of a class decorator in Python’s standard library is [`functools.total_ordering`](https://fpy.li/24-27) that generates special methods for object comparison.

For metaclasses, the main reference in Python’s documentation is [PEP 3115—Metaclasses in Python 3000](https://fpy.li/pep3115), in which the `__prepare__` special method was introduced.

[_Python in a Nutshell_](https://fpy.li/pynut3), 3rd ed., by Alex Martelli, Anna Ravenscroft, and Steve Holden, is authoritative, but was written before [PEP 487—Simpler customization of class creation](https://fpy.li/pep487) came out. The main metaclass example in that book—`MetaBunch`—is still valid, because it can’t be written with simpler mechanisms. Brett Slatkin’s [_Effective Python_](https://fpy.li/effectpy), 2nd ed. (Addison-Wesley) has several up-to-date examples of class building techniques, including metaclasses.

To learn about the origins of class metaprogramming in Python, I recommend Guido van Rossum’s paper from 2003, [“Unifying types and classes in Python 2.2”](https://fpy.li/24-28). The text applies to modern Python as well, as it covers what were then called the “new-style” class semantics—the default semantics in Python 3—including descriptors and metaclasses. One of the references cited by Guido is _Putting Metaclasses to Work: a New Dimension in Object-Oriented Programming_, by Ira R. Forman and Scott H. Danforth (Addison-Wesley), a book to which he gave five stars on _Amazon.com_, adding the following review:

> **This book contributed to the design for metaclasses in Python 2.2**
> 
> Too bad this is out of print; I keep referring to it as the best tutorial I know for the difficult subject of cooperative multiple inheritance, supported by Python via the `super()` function.[^19]

If you are keen on metaprogramming, you may wish Python had the ultimate metaprogramming feature: syntactic macros, as offered in the Lisp family of languages and—more recently—by Elixir and Rust. Syntactic macros are more powerful and less error prone than the primitive code substitution macros in the C language. They are special functions that rewrite source code using custom syntax into standard code before the compilation step, enabling developers to introduce new language constructs without changing the compiler. Like operator overloading, syntactic macros can be abused. But as long as the community understands and manages the downsides, they support powerful and user-friendly abstractions, like DSLs (Domain-Specific Languages). In September 2020, Python core developer Mark Shannon posted [PEP 638—Syntactic Macros](https://fpy.li/pep638), advocating just that. A year after it was initially published, PEP 638 was still in draft and there were no ongoing discussions about it. Clearly it’s not a top priority for the Python core developers. I would like to see PEP 638 further discussed and eventually approved. Syntactic macros would allow the Python community to experiment with controversial new features, such as the walrus operator ([PEP 572](https://fpy.li/pep572)), pattern matching ([PEP 634](https://fpy.li/pep634)), and alternative rules for evaluating type hints (PEPs [^563] package.

##### Soapbox

I will start the last soapbox in the book with a long quote from Brian Harvey and Matthew Wright, two computer science professors from the University of California (Berkeley and Santa Barbara). In their book, _Simply Scheme: Introducing Computer Science_ (MIT Press), Harvey and Wright wrote:

> There are two schools of thought about teaching computer science. We might caricature the two views this way:
> 
> 1. **The conservative view**: Computer programs have become too large and complex to encompass in a human mind. Therefore, the job of computer science education is to teach people how to discipline their work in such a way that 500 mediocre programmers can join together and produce a program that correctly meets its specification.
>     
> 2. **The radical view**: Computer programs have become too large and complex to encompass in a human mind. Therefore, the job of computer science education is to teach people how to expand their minds so that the programs can fit, by learning to think in a vocabulary of larger, more powerful, more flexible ideas than the obvious ones. Each unit of programming thought must have a big payoff in the capabilities of the program.
>     
> 
> Brian Harvey and Matthew Wright, preface to _Simply Scheme_[^20]

Harvey and Wright’s exaggerated descriptions are about teaching computer science, but they also apply to programming language design. By now, you should have guessed that I subscribe to the “radical” view, and I believe Python was designed in that spirit.

The property idea is a great step forward compared to the accessors-from-the-start approach practically demanded by Java and supported by Java IDEs generating getters/setters with a keyboard shortcut. The main advantage of properties is to let us start our programs simply exposing attributes as public—in the spirit of _KISS_—knowing a public attribute can become a property at any time without much pain. But the descriptor idea goes way beyond that, providing a framework for abstracting away repetitive accessor logic. That framework is so effective that essential Python constructs use it behind the scenes.

Another powerful idea is functions as first-class objects, paving the way to higher-order functions. Turns out the combination of descriptors and higher-order functions enable the unification of functions and methods. A function’s `__get__` produces a method object on the fly by binding the instance to the `self` argument. This is elegant.[^21]

Finally, we have the idea of classes as first-class objects. It’s an outstanding feat of design that a beginner-friendly language provides powerful abstractions such as class builders, class decorators, and full-fledged, user-defined metaclasses. Best of all, the advanced features are integrated in a way that does not complicate Python’s suitability for casual programming (they actually help it, under the covers). The convenience and success of frameworks such as Django and SQLAlchemy owe much to metaclasses. Over the years, class metaprogramming in Python is becoming simpler and simpler, at least for common use cases. The best language features are those that benefit everyone, even if some Python users are not aware of them. But they can always learn and create the next great library.

I look forward to learning about your contributions to the Python community and ecosystem!

[^1]: , page 10.

[^2]:  That doesn’t mean PEP 487 broke code that used those features. It just means that some code that used class decorators or metaclasses prior to Python 3.6 can now be refactored to use plain classes, resulting in simpler and possibly more efficient code.

[^3]:  Thanks to my friend J. S. O. Bueno for contributing to this example.

[^4]:  I did not add type hints to the arguments because the actual types are `Any`. I put the return type hint because otherwise Mypy will not check inside the method.

[^5]:  That’s true for any object, except when its class overrides the `__str__` or `__repr__` methods inherited from `object` with broken implementations.

[^6]:  if you are curious.

[^7]: .

[^8]: , the `Ellipsis` object is a convenient and safe sentinel value. It has been around for a long time, but recently people are finding more uses for it, as we see in type hints and NumPy.

[^9]: .

[^10]:  to explain why it was implemented as a class decorator.

[^11]:  Contrast with the `import` statement in Java, which is just a declaration to let the compiler know that certain packages are required.

[^12]:  I’m not saying opening a database connection just because a module is imported is a good idea, only pointing out it can be done.

[^13]: . The TimBot was inspired that day.

[^14]: `, instead of the older convention of adding a `__metaclass__` class-level attribute.

[^15]: .

[^16]:  If you just got dizzy considering the implications of multiple inheritance with metaclasses, good for you. I’d stay way from this solution as well.

[^17]:  I made a living writing Django code for a few years before I decided to study how Django’s model fields were implemented. Only then I learned about descriptors and metaclasses.

[^18]:  in DHH’s blog from 2005.

[^19]:  I bought a used copy and found it a very challenging read.

[^20]: .

[^21]:  opens with an intriguing discussion of elegance and aesthetics in works of engineering, from bridges to software. The later chapters are not great, but the opening is worth the price.