# Chapter Summary

This chapter started with an overview of attributes found in class objects, such as `__qualname__` and the `__subclasses__()` method. Next, we saw how the `type` built-in can be used to construct classes at runtime.

The `__init_subclass__` special method was introduced, with the first iteration of a `Checked` base class designed to replace attribute type hints in user-defined subclasses with `Field` instances that apply constructors to enforce the type of those attributes at runtime.

The same idea was implemented with a `@checked` class decorator that adds features to user-defined classes, similar to what `__init_subclass__` allows. We saw that neither `__init_subclass__` nor a class decorator can dynamically configure `__slots__`, because they operate only after a class is created.

The concepts of “import time” and “runtime” were clarified with experiments showing the order in which Python code is executed when modules, descriptors, class decorators, and `__init_subclass__` is involved.

Our coverage of metaclasses began with an overall explanation of `type` as a metaclass, and how user-defined metaclasses can implement `__new__` to customize the classes it builds. We then saw our first custom metaclass, the classic `MetaBunch` example using `__slots__`. Next, another evaluation time experiment demonstrated how the `__prepare__` and `__new__` methods of a metaclass are invoked earlier than `__init_subclass__` and class decorators, providing opportunities for deeper class customization.

The third iteration of a `Checked` class builder with `Field` descriptors and custom `__slots__` configuration was presented, followed by some general considerations about metaclass usage in practice.

Finally, we saw the `AutoConst` hack invented by João S. O. Bueno, based on the cunning idea of a metaclass with `__prepare__` returning a mapping that implements `__missing__`. In less than 20 lines of code, _autoconst.py_ showcases the power of combining Python metaprogramming techniques

I haven’t yet found a language that manages to be easy for beginners, practical for professionals, and exciting for hackers in the way that Python is. Thanks, Guido van Rossum and everybody else who makes it so.