# Classes as Objects

Like most program entities in Python, classes are also objects. Every class has a number of attributes defined in the Python Data Model, documented in [“4.13. Special Attributes”](https://fpy.li/24-1) of the “Built-in Types” chapter in _The Python Standard Library_. Three of those attributes appeared several times in this book already: `__class__`, `__name__`, and `__mro__`. Other class standard attributes are:

`cls.__bases__`

The tuple of base classes of the class.

`cls.__qualname__`

The qualified name of a class or function, which is a dotted path from the global scope of the module to the class definition. This is relevant when the class is defined inside another class. For example, in a Django model class such as [`Ox`](https://fpy.li/24-2), there is an inner class called `Meta`. The `__qualname__` of `Meta` is `Ox.Meta`, but its `__name__` is just `Meta`. The specification for this attribute is [PEP 3155—Qualified name for classes and functions](https://fpy.li/24-3).

`cls.__subclasses__()`

This method returns a list of the immediate subclasses of the class. The implementation uses weak references to avoid circular references between the superclass and its subclasses—which hold a strong reference to the superclasses in their `__bases__` attribute. The method lists subclasses currently in memory. Subclasses in modules not yet imported will not appear in the result.

`cls.mro()`

The interpreter calls this method when building a class to obtain the tuple of superclasses stored in the `__mro__` attribute of the class. A metaclass can override this method to customize the method resolution order of the class under construction.

###### Tip

None of the attributes mentioned in this section are listed by the `dir(…)` function.

Now, if a class is an object, what is the class of a class?