# type: The Built-In Class Factory

We usually think of `type` as a function that returns the class of an object, because that’s what `type(my_object)` does: it returns `my_object.__class__`.

However, `type` is a class that creates a new class when invoked with three arguments.

Consider this simple class:

```
class
```

Using the `type` constructor, you can create `MyClass` at runtime with this code:

```
MyClass
```

That `type` call is functionally equivalent to the previous `class MyClass…` block statement.

When Python reads a `class` statement, it calls `type` to build the class object with these parameters:

`name`

The identifier that appears after the `class` keyword, e.g., `MyClass`.

`bases`

The tuple of superclasses given in parentheses after the class identifier, or `(object,)` if superclasses are not mentioned in the `class` statement.

`dict`

A mapping of attribute names to values. Callables become methods, as we saw in [“Methods Are Descriptors”](ch23.html#methods_are_descriptors_sec). Other values become class attributes.

###### Note

The `type` constructor accepts optional keyword arguments, which are ignored by `type` itself, but are passed untouched into `__init_subclass__`, which must consume them. We’ll study that special method in [“Introducing __init_subclass__”](#enhancing_with_init_subclass), but I won’t cover the use of keyword arguments. For more, please read [PEP 487—Simpler customization of class creation](https://fpy.li/pep487).

The `type` class is a _metaclass_: a class that builds classes. In other words, instances of the `type` class are classes. The standard library provides a few other metaclasses, but `type` is the default:

```
>>> 
```

We’ll build custom metaclasses in [“Metaclasses 101”](#metclass101_sec).

Next, we’ll use the `type` built-in to make a function that builds classes.