# A Class Factory Function

The standard library has a class factory function that appears several times in this book: `collections.namedtuple`. In [Chapter 5](ch05.html#data_class_ch) we also saw `typing.NamedTuple` and `@dataclass`. All of these class builders leverage techniques covered in this chapter.

We’ll start with a super simple factory for classes of mutable objects—the simplest possible replacement for `@dataclass`.

Suppose I’m writing a pet shop application and I want to store data for dogs as simple records. But I don’t want to write boilerplate like this:

```
class
```

Boring…each field name appears three times, and that boilerplate doesn’t even buy us a nice `repr`:

```
>>> 
```

Taking a hint from `collections.namedtuple`, let’s create a `record_factory` that creates simple classes like `Dog` on the fly. [Example 24-1](#record_factory_demo) shows how it should work.

##### Example 24-1. Testing `record_factory`, a simple class factory

```
    
```

[![^1]

Factory can be called like `namedtuple`: class name, followed by attribute names separated by spaces in a single string.

[![^2]

Nice `repr`.

[![^3]

Instances are iterable, so they can be conveniently unpacked on assignment…

[![^4]

…or when passing to functions like `format`.

[![^5]

A record instance is mutable.

[![^6]

The newly created class inherits from `object`—no relationship to our factory.

The code for `record_factory` is in [Example 24-2](#record_factory_ex).[^3]

##### Example 24-2. record_factory.py: a simple class factory

```
from
```

[![^1]

User can provide field names as a single string or an iterable of strings.

[![^2]

Accept arguments like the first two of `collections.namedtuple`; return a `type`—i.e., a class that behaves like a `tuple`.

[![^3]

Build a tuple of attribute names; this will be the `__slots__` attribute of the new class.

[![^4]

This function will become the `__init__` method in the new class. It accepts positional and/or keyword arguments.[^4]

[![^5]

Yield the field values in the order given by `__slots__`.

[![^6]

Produce the nice `repr`, iterating over `__slots__` and `self`.

[![^7]

Assemble a dictionary of class attributes.

[![^8]

Build and return the new class, calling the `type` constructor.

[![^9]

Convert `names` separated by spaces or commas to list of `str`.

[Example 24-2](#record_factory_ex) is the first time we’ve seen `type` in a type hint. If the annotation was just `-> type`, that would mean that `record_factory` returns a class—and it would be correct. But the annotation `-> type[tuple]` is more precise: it says the returned class will be a subclass of `tuple`.

The last line of `record_factory` in [Example 24-2](#record_factory_ex) builds a class named by the value of `cls_name`, with `object` as its single immediate base class, and with a namespace loaded with `__slots__`, `__init__`, `__iter__`, and `__repr__`, of which the last three are instance methods.

We could have named the `__slots__` class attribute anything else, but then we’d have to implement `__setattr__` to validate the names of attributes being assigned, because for our record-like classes we want the set of attributes to be always the same and in the same order. However, recall that the main feature of `__slots__` is saving memory when you are dealing with millions of instances, and using `__slots__` has some drawbacks, discussed in [“Saving Memory with __slots__”](ch11.html#slots_section).

###### Warning

Instances of classes created by `record_factory` are not serializable—that is, they can’t be exported with the `dump` function from the `pickle` module. Solving this problem is beyond the scope of this example, which aims to show the `type` class in action in a simple use case. For the full solution, study the source code for [`collections.namedtuple`](https://fpy.li/24-4); search for the word “pickling.”

Now let’s see how to emulate more modern class builders like `typing.NamedTuple`, which takes a user-defined class written as a `class` statement, and automatically enhances it with more functionality.