### Asynchronous generators as context managers

Writing our own asynchronous context managers is not a frequent programming task, but if you need to write one, consider using the [`@asynccontextmanager`](https://fpy.li/21-46) decorator added to the `contextlib` module in Python 3.7. That’s very similar to the `@contextmanager` decorator we studied in [“Using @contextmanager”](ch18.html#using_cm_decorator_sec).

An interesting example combining `@asynccontextmanager` with `loop.run_in_executor` appears in Caleb Hattingh’s book [_Using Asyncio in Python_](https://fpy.li/hattingh). [Example 21-20](#asynccontextmanager_ex) is Caleb’s code—with a single change and added callouts.

##### Example 21-20. Example using `@asynccontextmanager` and `loop.run_in_executor`

```
from
```

[![^1]

The decorated function must be an asynchronous generator.

[![^2]

Minor update to Caleb’s code: use the lightweight `get_running_loop` instead of `get_event_loop`.

[![^3]

Suppose `download_webpage` is a blocking function using the _requests_ library; we run it in a separate thread to avoid blocking the event loop.

[![^4]

All lines before this `yield` expression will become the `__aenter__` coroutine-method of the asynchronous context manager built by the decorator. The value of `data` will be bound to the `data` variable after the `as` clause in the `async with` statement below.

[![^5]

Lines after the `yield` will become the `__aexit__` coroutine method. Here, another blocking call is delegated to the thread executor.

[![^6]

Use `web_page` with `async with`.

This is very similar to the sequential `@contextmanager` decorator. Please see [“Using @contextmanager”](ch18.html#using_cm_decorator_sec) for more details, including error handling at the `yield` line. For another example of `@asynccontextmanager`, see the [`contextlib` documentation](https://fpy.li/21-46).

Now let’s wrap up our coverage of asynchronous generator functions by contrasting them with native coroutines.