## List Comprehensions and Readability

Here is a test: which do you find easier to read, [Example 2-1](#ex_build_list) or [Example 2-2](#ex_listcomp0)?

##### Example 2-1. Build a list of Unicode code points from a string

```
>>> 
```

##### Example 2-2. Build a list of Unicode code points from a string, using a listcomp

```
>>> 
```

Anybody who knows a little bit of Python can read [Example 2-1](#ex_build_list). However, after learning about listcomps, I find [Example 2-2](#ex_listcomp0) more readable because its intent is explicit.

A `for` loop may be used to do lots of different things: scanning a sequence to count or pick items, computing aggregates (sums, averages), or any number of other tasks. The code in [Example 2-1](#ex_build_list) is building up a list. In contrast, a listcomp is more explicit. Its goal is always to build a new list.

Of course, it is possible to abuse list comprehensions to write truly incomprehensible code. I’ve seen Python code with listcomps used just to repeat a block of code for its side effects. If you are not doing something with the produced list, you should not use that syntax. Also, try to keep it short. If the list comprehension spans more than two lines, it is probably best to break it apart or rewrite it as a plain old `for` loop. Use your best judgment: for Python, as for English, there are no hard-and-fast rules for clear writing.

# Syntax Tip

In Python code, line breaks are ignored inside pairs of `[]`, `{}`, or `()`. So you can build multiline lists, listcomps, tuples, dictionaries, etc., without using the `\` line continuation escape, which doesn’t work if you accidentally type a space after it. Also, when those delimiter pairs are used to define a literal with a comma-separated series of items, a trailing comma will be ignored. So, for example, when coding a multiline list literal, it is thoughtful to put a comma after the last item, making it a little easier for the next coder to add one more item to that list, and reducing noise when reading diffs.

##### Local Scope Within Comprehensions and Generator Expressions

In Python 3, list comprehensions, generator expressions, and their siblings `set` and `dict` comprehensions, have a local scope to hold the variables assigned in the `for` clause.

However, variables assigned with the “Walrus operator” `:=` remain accessible after those comprehensions or expressions return—unlike local variables in a function. [PEP 572—Assignment Expressions](https://fpy.li/pep572) defines the scope of the target of `:=` as the enclosing function, unless there is a `global` or `nonlocal` declaration for that target.[^2]

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`x` was not clobbered: it’s still bound to `'ABC'`.

[![^2]

`last` remains.

[![^3]

`c` is gone; it existed only inside the listcomp.

List comprehensions build lists from sequences or any other iterable type by filtering and transforming items. The `filter` and `map` built-ins can be composed to do the same, but readability suffers, as we will see next.