## Generator Expressions

To initialize tuples, arrays, and other types of sequences, you could also start from a listcomp, but a genexp (generator expression) saves memory because it yields items one by one using the iterator protocol instead of building a whole list just to feed another constructor.

Genexps use the same syntax as listcomps, but are enclosed in parentheses rather than brackets.

[Example 2-5](#ex_genexp_load) shows basic usage of genexps to build a tuple and an array.

##### Example 2-5. Initializing a tuple and an array from a generator expression

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

If the generator expression is the single argument in a function call, there is no need to duplicate the enclosing parentheses.

[![^2]

The `array` constructor takes two arguments, so the parentheses around the generator expression are mandatory. The first argument of the `array` constructor defines the storage type used for the numbers in the array, as we’ll see in [“Arrays”](#arrays_sec).

[Example 2-6](#ex_genexp_cartesian) uses a genexp with a Cartesian product to print out a roster of T-shirts of two colors in three sizes. In contrast with [Example 2-4](#ex_listcomp_cartesian), here the six-item list of T-shirts is never built in memory: the generator expression feeds the `for` loop producing one item at a time. If the two lists used in the Cartesian product had a thousand items each, using a generator expression would save the cost of building a list with a million items just to feed the `for` loop.

##### Example 2-6. Cartesian product in a generator expression

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

The generator expression yields items one by one; a list with all six T-shirt variations is never produced in this example.

###### Note

[Chapter 17](ch17.html#iterables2generators) explains how generators work in detail. Here the idea was just to show the use of generator expressions to initialize sequences other than lists, or to produce output that you don’t need to keep in memory.

Now we move on to the other fundamental sequence type in Python: the tuple.