# Downloading with asyncio and HTTPX

The _flags_asyncio.py_ script downloads a fixed set of 20 flags from _fluentpython.com_. We first mentioned it in [“Concurrent Web Downloads”](ch20.html#ex_web_downloads_sec), but now we’ll study it in detail, applying the concepts we just saw.

As of Python 3.10, _asyncio_ only supports TCP and UDP directly, and there are no asynchronous HTTP client or server packages in the standard library. I am using [_HTTPX_](https://fpy.li/httpx) in all the HTTP client examples.

We’ll explore _flags_asyncio.py_ from the bottom up—that is, looking first at the functions that set up the action in [Example 21-2](#flags_asyncio_start_ex).

###### Warning

To make the code easier to read, _flags_asyncio.py_ has no error handling. As we introduce `async/await`, it’s useful to focus on the “happy path” initially, to understand how regular functions and coroutines are arranged in a program. Starting with [“Enhancing the asyncio Downloader”](#flags2_asyncio_sec), the examples include error handling and more features.

The _flags_.py_ examples from this chapter and [Chapter 20](ch20.html#futures_ch) share code and data, so I put them together in the [_example-code-2e/20-executors/getflags_](https://fpy.li/21-9) directory.

##### Example 21-2. flags_asyncio.py: startup functions

```
def
```

[![^1]

This needs to be a plain function—not a coroutine—so it can be passed to and called by the `main` function from the _flags.py_ module ([Example 20-2](ch20.html#flags_module_ex)).

[![^2]

Execute the event loop driving the `supervisor(cc_list)` coroutine object until it returns. This will block while the event loop runs. The result of this line is whatever `supervisor` returns.

[![^3]

Asynchronous HTTP client operations in `httpx` are methods of `AsyncClient`, which is also an asynchronous context manager: a context manager with asynchronous setup and teardown methods (more about this in [“Asynchronous Context Managers”](#async_context_manager_sec)).

[![^4]

Build a list of coroutine objects by calling the `download_one` coroutine once for each flag to be retrieved.

[![^5]

Wait for the `asyncio.gather` coroutine, which accepts one or more awaitable arguments and waits for all of them to complete, returning a list of results for the given awaitables in the order they were submitted.

[![^6]

`supervisor` returns the length of the list returned by `asyncio.gather`.

Now let’s review the top of _flags_asyncio.py_ ([Example 21-3](#flags_asyncio_ex)). I reorganized the coroutines so we can read them in the order they are started by the event loop.

##### Example 21-3. flags_asyncio.py: imports and download functions

```
import
```

[![^1]

`httpx` must be installed—it’s not in the standard library.

[![^2]

Reuse code from _flags.py_ ([Example 20-2](ch20.html#flags_module_ex)).

[![^3]

`download_one` must be a native coroutine, so it can `await` on `get_flag`—which does the HTTP request. Then it displays the code of the downloaded flag, and saves the image.

[![^4]

`get_flag` needs to receive the `AsyncClient` to make the request.

[![^5]

The `get` method of an `httpx.AsyncClient` instance returns a `ClientResponse` object that is also an asynchronous context manager.

[![^6]

Network I/O operations are implemented as coroutine methods, so they are driven asynchronously by the `asyncio` event loop.

###### Note

For better performance, the `save_flag` call inside `get_flag` should be asynchronous, to avoid blocking the event loop. However, _asyncio_ does not provide an asynchronous filesystem API at this time—as Node.js does.

[“Using asyncio.as_completed and a Thread”](#using_as_completed_sec) will show how to delegate `save_flag` to a thread.

Your code delegates to the `httpx` coroutines explicitly through `await` or implicitly through the special methods of the asynchronous context managers, such as `Async​Client` and `ClientResponse`—as we’ll see in [“Asynchronous Context Managers”](#async_context_manager_sec).