### Experimenting with Python’s async console

[Since Python 3.8](https://fpy.li/21-44), you can run the interpreter with the `-m asyncio` command-line option to get an “async REPL”: a Python console that imports `asyncio`, provides a running event loop, and accepts `await`, `async for`, and `async with` at the top-level prompt—which otherwise are syntax errors when used outside of native coroutines.[^15]

To experiment with _domainlib.py_, go to the _21-async/domains/asyncio/_ directory in your local copy of the [_Fluent Python_ code repository](https://fpy.li/code). Then run:

$ python -m asyncio

You’ll see the console start, similar to this:

asyncio REPL `3`.9.1 `(`v3.9.1:1e5d33e9b9, Dec  `7` `2020`, `12`:10:52`)`
`[`Clang `6`.0 `(`clang-600.0.57`)]` on darwin
Use `"await"` directly instead of `"asyncio.run()"`.
Type `"help"`, `"copyright"`, `"credits"` or `"license"` `for` more information.
>>> import asyncio
>>>

Note how the header says you can use `await` instead of `asyncio.run()`—to drive coroutines and other awaitables. Also: I did not type `import asyncio`. The `asyncio` module is automatically imported and that line makes that fact clear to the user.

Now let’s import _domainlib.py_ and play with its two coroutines: `probe` and `multi_probe` ([Example 21-16](#domainlib_demo_repl)).

##### Example 21-16. Experimenting with _domainlib.py_ after running `python3 -m asyncio`

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Try a simple `await` to see the asynchronous console in action. Tip: `asyncio.sleep()` takes an optional second argument that is returned when you `await` it.

[![^2]

Drive the `probe` coroutine.

[![^3]

The `domainlib` version of `probe` returns a `Result` named tuple.

[![^4]

Make a list of domains. The `.invalid` top-level domain is reserved for testing. DNS queries for such domains always get an NXDOMAIN response from DNS servers, meaning “that domain does not exist.”[^16]

[![^5]

Iterate with `async for` over the `multi_probe` asynchronous generator to display the results.

[![^6]

Note that the results are not in the order the domains were given to `multiprobe`. They appear as each DNS response comes back.

[Example 21-16](#domainlib_demo_repl) shows that `multi_probe` is an asynchronous generator because it is compatible with `async for`. Now let’s do a few more experiments, continuing from that example with [Example 21-17](#domainlib_more_exp_repl).

##### Example 21-17. More experiments, continuing from [Example 21-16](#domainlib_demo_repl)

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Calling a native coroutine gives you a coroutine object.

[![^2]

Calling an asynchronous generator gives you an `async_generator` object.

[![^3]

We can’t use a regular `for` loop with asynchronous generators because they implement `__aiter__` instead of `__iter__`.

Asynchronous generators are driven by `async for`, which can be a block statement (as seen in [Example 21-16](#domainlib_demo_repl)), and it also appears in asynchronous comprehensions, which we’ll cover soon.