### Implementing an asynchronous generator

Now let’s study the code for _domainlib.py_, with the `multi_probe` asynchronous generator ([Example 21-18](#domainlib_ex)).

##### Example 21-18. domainlib.py: functions for probing domains

```
import
```

[![^1]

`NamedTuple` makes the result from `probe` easier to read and debug.

[![^2]

This type alias is to avoid making the next line too long for a book listing.

[![^3]

`probe` now gets an optional `loop` argument, to avoid repeated calls to `get_running_loop` when this coroutine is driven by `multi_probe`.

[![^4]

An asynchronous generator function produces an asynchronous generator object, which can be annotated as `AsyncIterator[SomeType]`.

[![^5]

Build list of `probe` coroutine objects, each with a different `domain`.

[![^6]

This is not `async for` because `asyncio.as_completed` is a classic generator.

[![^7]

Await on the coroutine object to retrieve the result.

[![^8]

Yield `result`. This line makes `multi_probe` an asynchronous generator.

###### Note

The `for` loop in [Example 21-18](#domainlib_ex) could be more concise:

    `for` `coro` `in` `asyncio``.``as_completed``(``coros``):`
        `yield` `await` `coro`

Python parses that as `yield (await coro)`, so it works.

I thought it could be confusing to use that shortcut in the first asynchronous generator example in the book, so I split it into two lines.

Given _domainlib.py_, we can demonstrate the use of the `multi_probe` asynchronous generator in _domaincheck.py_: a script that takes a domain suffix and searches for domains made from short Python keywords.

Here is a sample output of _domaincheck.py_:

$ ./domaincheck.py net
FOUND           NOT FOUND
=====           =========
in.net
del.net
true.net
for.net
is.net
                none.net
try.net
                from.net
and.net
or.net
else.net
with.net
if.net
as.net
                elif.net
                pass.net
                not.net
                def.net

Thanks to _domainlib_, the code for _domaincheck.py_ is straightforward, as seen in [Example 21-19](#domaincheck_ex).

##### Example 21-19. domaincheck.py: utility for probing domains using domainlib

```
#!/usr/bin/env python3
```

[![^1]

Generate keywords with length up to `4`.

[![^2]

Generate domain names with the given suffix as TLD.

[![^3]

Format a header for the tabular output.

[![^4]

Asynchronously iterate over `multi_probe(domains)`.

[![^5]

Set `indent` to zero or two tabs to put the result in the proper column.

[![^6]

Run the `main` coroutine with the given command-line argument.

Generators have one extra use unrelated to iteration: they can be made into context managers. This also applies to asynchronous generators.