# Byte Essentials

The new binary sequence types are unlike the Python 2 `str` in many regards. The first thing to know is that there are two basic built-in types for binary sequences: the immutable `bytes` type introduced in Python 3 and the mutable `bytearray`, added way back in Python 2.6.[^2] The Python documentation sometimes uses the generic term “byte string” to refer to both `bytes` and `bytearray`. I avoid that confusing term.

Each item in `bytes` or `bytearray` is an integer from 0 to 255, and not a one-character string like in the Python 2 `str`. However, a slice of a binary sequence always produces a binary sequence of the same type—including slices of length 1. See [Example 4-2](#ex_bytes_bytearray).

##### Example 4-2. A five-byte sequence as `bytes` and as `bytearray`

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`bytes` can be built from a `str`, given an encoding.

[![^2]

Each item is an integer in `range(256)`.

[![^3]

Slices of `bytes` are also `bytes`—even slices of a single byte.

[![^4]

There is no literal syntax for `bytearray`: they are shown as `bytearray()` with a `bytes` literal as argument.

[![^5]

A slice of `bytearray` is also a `bytearray`.

###### Warning

The fact that `my_bytes[0]` retrieves an `int` but `my_bytes[:1]` returns a `bytes` sequence of length 1 is only surprising because we are used to Python’s `str` type, where `s[0] == s[:1]`. For all other sequence types in Python, 1 item is not the same as a slice of length 1.

Although binary sequences are really sequences of integers, their literal notation reflects the fact that ASCII text is often embedded in them. Therefore, four different displays are used, depending on each byte value:

- For bytes with decimal codes 32 to 126—from space to `~` (tilde)—the ASCII character itself is used.
    
- For bytes corresponding to tab, newline, carriage return, and `\`, the escape sequences `\t`, `\n`, `\r`, and `\\` are used.
    
- If both string delimiters `'` and `"` appear in the byte sequence, the whole sequence is delimited by `'`, and any `'` inside are escaped as `\'`.[^3]
    
- For other byte values, a hexadecimal escape sequence is used (e.g., `\x00` is the null byte).
    

That is why in [Example 4-2](#ex_bytes_bytearray) you see `b'caf\xc3\xa9'`: the first three bytes `b'caf'` are in the printable ASCII range, the last two are not.

Both `bytes` and `bytearray` support every `str` method except those that do formatting (`format`, `format_map`) and those that depend on Unicode data, including `casefold`, `isdecimal`, `isidentifier`, `isnumeric`, `isprintable`, and `encode`. This means that you can use familiar string methods like `endswith`, `replace`, `strip`, `translate`, `upper`, and dozens of others with binary sequences—only using `bytes` and not `str` arguments. In addition, the regular expression functions in the `re` module also work on binary sequences, if the regex is compiled from a binary sequence instead of a `str`. Since Python 3.5, the `%` operator works with binary sequences again.[^4]

Binary sequences have a class method that `str` doesn’t have, called `fromhex`, which builds a binary sequence by parsing pairs of hex digits optionally separated by spaces:

```
>>> 
```

The other ways of building `bytes` or `bytearray` instances are calling their constructors with:

- A `str` and an `encoding` keyword argument
    
- An iterable providing items with values from 0 to 255
    
- An object that implements the buffer protocol (e.g., `bytes`, `bytearray`, `memoryview`, `array.array`) that copies the bytes from the source object to the newly created binary sequence
    

###### Warning

Until Python 3.5, it was also possible to call `bytes` or `bytearray` with a single integer to create a binary sequence of that size initialized with null bytes. This signature was deprecated in Python 3.5 and removed in Python 3.6. See [PEP 467—Minor API improvements for binary sequences](https://fpy.li/pep467).

Building a binary sequence from a buffer-like object is a low-level operation that may involve type casting. See a demonstration in [Example 4-3](#ex_buffer_demo).

##### Example 4-3. Initializing bytes from the raw data of an array

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Typecode `'h'` creates an `array` of short integers (16 bits).

[![^2]

`octets` holds a copy of the bytes that make up `numbers`.

[![^3]

These are the 10 bytes that represent the 5 short integers.

Creating a `bytes` or `bytearray` object from any buffer-like source will always copy the bytes. In contrast, `memoryview` objects let you share memory between binary data structures, as we saw in [“Memory Views”](ch02.html#memoryview_sec).

After this basic exploration of binary sequence types in Python, let’s see how they are converted to/from strings.