# Chapter 1. The Python Data Model

> Guido’s sense of the aesthetics of language design is amazing. I’ve met many fine language designers who could build theoretically beautiful languages that no one would ever use, but Guido is one of those rare people who can build a language that is just slightly less theoretically beautiful but thereby is a joy to write programs in.
> 
> Jim Hugunin, creator of Jython, cocreator of AspectJ, and architect of the .Net DLR[^1]

One of the best qualities of Python is its consistency. After working with Python for a while, you are able to start making informed, correct guesses about features that are new to you.

However, if you learned another object-oriented language before Python, you may find it strange to use `len(collection)` instead of `collection.len()`. This apparent oddity is the tip of an iceberg that, when properly understood, is the key to everything we call _Pythonic_. The iceberg is called the Python Data Model, and it is the API that we use to make our own objects play well with the most idiomatic language features.

You can think of the data model as a description of Python as a framework. It formalizes the interfaces of the building blocks of the language itself, such as sequences, functions, iterators, coroutines, classes, context managers, and so on.

When using a framework, we spend a lot of time coding methods that are called by the framework. The same happens when we leverage the Python Data Model to build new classes. The Python interpreter invokes special methods to perform basic object operations, often triggered by special syntax. The special method names are always written with leading and trailing double underscores. For example, the syntax `obj[key]` is supported by the `__getitem__` special method. In order to evaluate `my_collection[key]`, the interpreter calls `my_collection.__getitem__(key)`.

We implement special methods when we want our objects to support and interact with fundamental language constructs such as:

- Collections
    
- Attribute access
    
- Iteration (including asynchronous iteration using `async for`)
    
- Operator overloading
    
- Function and method invocation
    
- String representation and formatting
    
- Asynchronous programming using `await`
    
- Object creation and destruction
    
- Managed contexts using the `with` or `async with` statements
    

# Magic and Dunder

The term _magic method_ is slang for special method, but how do we talk about a specific method like `__getitem__`? I learned to say “dunder-getitem” from author and teacher Steve Holden. “Dunder” is a shortcut for “double underscore before and after.” That’s why the special methods are also known as _dunder methods_. The [“Lexical Analysis”](https://fpy.li/1-3) chapter of _The Python Language Reference_ warns that “_Any_ use of `__*__` names, in any context, that does not follow explicitly documented use, is subject to breakage without warning.”