# A Pythonic Card Deck

[Example 1-1](#ex_pythonic_deck) is simple, but it demonstrates the power of implementing just two special methods, `__getitem__` and `__len__`.

##### Example 1-1. A deck as a sequence of playing cards

```
import
```

The first thing to note is the use of `collections.namedtuple` to construct a simple class to represent individual cards. We use `namedtuple` to build classes of objects that are just bundles of attributes with no custom methods, like a database record. In the example, we use it to provide a nice representation for the cards in the deck, as shown in the console session:

```
>>> 
```

But the point of this example is the `FrenchDeck` class. It’s short, but it packs a punch. First, like any standard Python collection, a deck responds to the `len()` function by returning the number of cards in it:

```
>>> 
```

Reading specific cards from the deck—say, the first or the last—is easy, thanks to the `__getitem__` method:

```
>>> 
```

Should we create a method to pick a random card? No need. Python already has a function to get a random item from a sequence: `random.choice`. We can use it on a deck instance:

```
>>> 
```

We’ve just seen two advantages of using special methods to leverage the Python Data Model:

- Users of your classes don’t have to memorize arbitrary method names for standard operations. (“How to get the number of items? Is it `.size()`, `.length()`, or what?”)
    
- It’s easier to benefit from the rich Python standard library and avoid reinventing the wheel, like the `random.choice` function.
    

But it gets better.

Because our `__getitem__` delegates to the `[]` operator of `self._cards`, our deck automatically supports slicing. Here’s how we look at the top three cards from a brand-new deck, and then pick just the aces by starting at index 12 and skipping 13 cards at a time:

```
>>> 
```

Just by implementing the `__getitem__` special method, our deck is also iterable:

```
>>> 
```

We can also iterate over the deck in reverse:

```
>>> 
```

# Ellipsis in doctests

Whenever possible, I extracted the Python console listings in this book from [`doctest`](https://fpy.li/doctest) to ensure accuracy. When the output was too long, the elided part is marked by an ellipsis (`...`), like in the last line in the preceding code. In such cases, I used the `# doctest: +ELLIPSIS` directive to make the doctest pass. If you are trying these examples in the interactive console, you may omit the doctest comments altogether.

Iteration is often implicit. If a collection has no `__contains__` method, the `in` operator does a sequential scan. Case in point: `in` works with our `FrenchDeck` class because it is iterable. Check it out:

```
>>> 
```

How about sorting? A common system of ranking cards is by rank (with aces being highest), then by suit in the order of spades (highest), hearts, diamonds, and clubs (lowest). Here is a function that ranks cards by that rule, returning `0` for the 2 of clubs and `51` for the ace of spades:

```
suit_values
```

Given `spades_high`, we can now list our deck in order of increasing rank:

```
>>> 
```

Although `FrenchDeck` implicitly inherits from the `object` class, most of its functionality is not inherited, but comes from leveraging the data model and composition. By implementing the special methods `__len__` and `__getitem__`, our `FrenchDeck` behaves like a standard Python sequence, allowing it to benefit from core language features (e.g., iteration and slicing) and from the standard library, as shown by the examples using `random.choice`, `reversed`, and `sorted`. Thanks to composition, the `__len__` and `__getitem__` implementations can delegate all the work to a `list` object, `self._cards`.

# How About Shuffling?

As implemented so far, a `FrenchDeck` cannot be shuffled because it is _immutable_: the cards and their positions cannot be changed, except by violating encapsulation and handling the `_cards` attribute directly. In [Chapter 13](ch13.html#ifaces_prot_abc), we will fix that by adding a one-line `__setitem__` method.