# Further Reading

The [“Data Model” chapter](https://fpy.li/dtmodel) of _The Python Language Reference_ is the canonical source for the subject of this chapter and much of this book.

[_Python in a Nutshell_, 3rd ed.](https://fpy.li/pynut3) by Alex Martelli, Anna Ravenscroft, and Steve Holden (O’Reilly) has excellent coverage of the data model. Their description of the mechanics of attribute access is the most authoritative I’ve seen apart from the actual C source code of CPython. Martelli is also a prolific contributor to Stack Overflow, with more than 6,200 answers posted. See his user profile at [Stack Overflow](https://fpy.li/1-9).

David Beazley has two books covering the data model in detail in the context of Python 3: [_Python Essential Reference_](https://dabeaz.com/per.html), 4th ed. (Addison-Wesley), and [_Python Cookbook_, 3rd ed.](https://fpy.li/pycook3) (O’Reilly), coauthored with Brian K. Jones.

[_The Art of the Metaobject Protocol_](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/art-metaobject-protocol) (MIT Press) by Gregor Kiczales, Jim des Rivieres, and Daniel G. Bobrow explains the concept of a metaobject protocol, of which the Python Data Model is one example.

##### Soapbox

Data Model or Object Model?

What the Python documentation calls the “Python Data Model,” most authors would say is the “Python object model.” Martelli, Ravenscroft, and Holden’s _Python in a Nutshell_, 3rd ed., and David Beazley’s _Python Essential Reference_, 4th ed. are the best books covering the Python Data Model, but they refer to it as the “object model.” On Wikipedia, the first definition of [“object model”](https://fpy.li/1-10) is: “The properties of objects in general in a specific computer programming language.” This is what the Python Data Model is about. In this book, I will use “data model” because the documentation favors that term when referring to the Python object model, and because it is the title of the [chapter of _The Python Language Reference_](https://fpy.li/dtmodel) most relevant to our discussions.

Muggle Methods

[_The Original Hacker’s Dictionary_](https://fpy.li/1-11) defines _magic_ as “yet unexplained, or too complicated to explain” or “a feature not generally publicized which allows something otherwise impossible.”

The Ruby community calls their equivalent of the special methods _magic methods_. Many in the Python community adopt that term as well. I believe the special methods are the opposite of magic. Python and Ruby empower their users with a rich metaobject protocol that is fully documented, enabling muggles like you and me to emulate many of the features available to core developers who write the interpreters for those languages.

In contrast, consider Go. Some objects in that language have features that are magic, in the sense that we cannot emulate them in our own user-defined types. For example, Go arrays, strings, and maps support the use brackets for item access, as in `a[i]`. But there’s no way to make the `[]` notation work with a new collection type that you define. Even worse, Go has no user-level concept of an iterable interface or an iterator object, therefore its `for/range` syntax is limited to supporting five “magic” built-in types, including arrays, strings, and maps.

Maybe in the future, the designers of Go will enhance its metaobject protocol. But currently, it is much more limited than what we have in Python or Ruby.

Metaobjects

_The Art of the Metaobject Protocol (AMOP)_ is my favorite computer book title. But I mention it because the term _metaobject protocol_ is useful to think about the Python Data Model and similar features in other languages. The _metaobject_ part refers to the objects that are the building blocks of the language itself. In this context, _protocol_ is a synonym of _interface_. So a _metaobject protocol_ is a fancy synonym for object model: an API for core language constructs.

A rich metaobject protocol enables extending a language to support new programming paradigms. Gregor Kiczales, the first author of the _AMOP_ book, later became a pioneer in aspect-oriented programming and the initial author of AspectJ, an extension of Java implementing that paradigm. Aspect-oriented programming is much easier to implement in a dynamic language like Python, and some frameworks do it. The most important example is [_zope.interface_](https://fpy.li/1-12), part of the framework on which the [Plone content management](https://fpy.li/1-13) system is built.

[^1]: .

[^2]:  A C struct is a record type with named fields.