## LineItem Take #1: Class for an Item in an Order

Imagine an app for a store that sells organic food in bulk, where customers can order nuts, dried fruit, or cereals by weight. In that system, each order would hold a sequence of line items, and each line item could be represented by an instance of a class, as in [Example 22-19](#lineitem_class_v1).

##### Example 22-19. bulkfood_v1.py: the simplest `LineItem` class

```
class
```

That’s nice and simple. Perhaps too simple. [Example 22-20](#lineitem_problem_v1) shows a problem.

##### Example 22-20. A negative weight results in a negative subtotal

    `>>>` `raisins` `=` `LineItem``(``'Golden raisins'``,` `10``,` `6.95``)`
    `>>>` `raisins``.``subtotal``()`
    `69.5`
    `>>>` `raisins``.``weight` `=` `-``20`  `# garbage in...`
    `>>>` `raisins``.``subtotal``()`    `# garbage out...`
    `-``139.0`

This is a toy example, but not as fanciful as you may think. Here is a story from the early days of Amazon.com:

> We found that customers could order a negative quantity of books! And we would credit their credit card with the price and, I assume, wait around for them to ship the books.
> 
> Jeff Bezos, founder and CEO of Amazon.com[^10]

How do we fix this? We could change the interface of `LineItem` to use a getter and a setter for the `weight` attribute. That would be the Java way, and it’s not wrong.

On the other hand, it’s natural to be able to set the `weight` of an item by just assigning to it; and perhaps the system is in production with other parts already accessing `item.weight` directly. In this case, the Python way would be to replace the data attribute with a property.