## LineItem Take #2: A Validating Property

Implementing a property will allow us to use a getter and a setter, but the interface of `LineItem` will not change (i.e., setting the `weight` of a `LineItem` will still be written as `raisins.weight = 12`).

[Example 22-21](#lineitem_class_v2) lists the code for a read/write `weight` property.

##### Example 22-21. bulkfood_v2.py: a `LineItem` with a `weight` property

```
class
```

[![^1]

Here the property setter is already in use, making sure that no instances with negative `weight` can be created.

[![^2]

`@property` decorates the getter method.

[![^3]

All the methods that implement a property share the name of the public attribute: `weight`.

[![^4]

The actual value is stored in a private attribute `__weight`.

[![^5]

The decorated getter has a `.setter` attribute, which is also a decorator; this ties the getter and setter together.

[![^6]

If the value is greater than zero, we set the private `__weight`.

[![^7]

Otherwise, `ValueError` is raised.

Note how a `LineItem` with an invalid weight cannot be created now:

```
>>> 
```

Now we have protected `weight` from users providing negative values. Although buyers usually can’t set the price of an item, a clerical error or a bug may create a `LineItem` with a negative `price`. To prevent that, we could also turn `price` into a property, but this would entail some repetition in our code.

Remember the Paul Graham quote from [Chapter 17](ch17.html#iterables2generators): “When I see patterns in my programs, I consider it a sign of trouble.” The cure for repetition is abstraction. There are two ways to abstract away property definitions: using a property factory or a descriptor class. The descriptor class approach is more flexible, and we’ll devote [Chapter 23](ch23.html#attribute_descriptors) to a full discussion of it. Properties are in fact implemented as descriptor classes themselves. But here we will continue our exploration of properties by implementing a property factory as a function.

But before we can implement a property factory, we need to have a deeper understanding of properties.