# Sorting Unicode Text

Python sorts sequences of any type by comparing the items in each sequence one by one. For strings, this means comparing the code points. Unfortunately, this produces unacceptable results for anyone who uses non-ASCII characters.

Consider sorting a list of fruits grown in Brazil:

```
>>> 
```

Sorting rules vary for different locales, but in Portuguese and many languages that use the Latin alphabet, accents and cedillas rarely make a difference when sorting.[^8] So “cajá” is sorted as “caja,” and must come before “caju.”

The sorted `fruits` list should be:

```
[
```

The standard way to sort non-ASCII text in Python is to use the `locale.strxfrm` function which, according to the [`locale` module docs](https://fpy.li/4-16), “transforms a string to one that can be used in locale-aware comparisons.”

To enable `locale.strxfrm`, you must first set a suitable locale for your application, and pray that the OS supports it. The sequence of commands in [Example 4-19](#ex_locale_sort) may work for you.

##### Example 4-19. _locale_sort.py_: using the `locale.strxfrm` function as the sort key

```
import
```

Running [Example 4-19](#ex_locale_sort) on GNU/Linux (Ubuntu 19.10) with the `pt_BR.UTF-8` locale installed, I get the correct result:

```
'pt_BR.UTF-8'
```

So you need to call `setlocale(LC_COLLATE, «your_locale»)` before using `locale.strxfrm` as the key when sorting.

There are some caveats, though:

- Because locale settings are global, calling `setlocale` in a library is not recommended. Your application or framework should set the locale when the process starts, and should not change it afterward.
    
- The locale must be installed on the OS, otherwise `setlocale` raises a `locale.Error: unsupported locale setting` exception.
    
- You must know how to spell the locale name.
    
- The locale must be correctly implemented by the makers of the OS. I was successful on Ubuntu 19.10, but not on macOS 10.14. On macOS, the call `setlocale(LC_COLLATE, 'pt_BR.UTF-8')` returns the string `'pt_BR.UTF-8'` with no complaints. But `sorted(fruits, key=locale.strxfrm)` produced the same incorrect result as `sorted(fruits)` did. I also tried the `fr_FR`, `es_ES`, and `de_DE` locales on macOS, but `locale.strxfrm` never did its job.[^9]
    

So the standard library solution to internationalized sorting works, but seems to be well supported only on GNU/Linux (perhaps also on Windows, if you are an expert). Even then, it depends on locale settings, creating deployment headaches.

Fortunately, there is a simpler solution: the _pyuca_ library, available on _PyPI_.