## Step 4: Bespoke Property Cache

Caching properties is a common need because there is an expectation that an expression like `event.venue` should be inexpensive.[^8] Some form of caching could become necessary if the `Record.fetch` method behind the `Event` properties needed to query a database or a web API.

In the first edition _Fluent Python_, I coded the custom caching logic for the `speakers` method, as shown in [Example 22-15](#ex_schedule_v4_hasattr).

##### Example 22-15. Custom caching logic using `hasattr` disables key-sharing optimization

```
    
```

[![^1]

If the instance doesn’t have an attribute named `__speaker_objs`, fetch the speaker objects and store them there.

[![^2]

Return `self.__speaker_objs`.

The handmade caching in [Example 22-15](#ex_schedule_v4_hasattr) is straightforward, but creating an attribute after the instance is initialized defeats the [PEP 412—Key-Sharing Dictionary](https://fpy.li/pep412) optimization, as explained in [“Practical Consequences of How dict Works”](ch03.html#consequences_dict_internals). Depending on the size of the dataset, the difference in memory usage may be important.

A similar hand-rolled solution that works well with the key-sharing optimization requires coding an `__init__` for the `Event` class, to create the necessary `__speaker_objs` initialized to `None`, and then checking for that in the `speakers` method. See [Example 22-16](#ex_schedule_v4).

##### Example 22-16. Storage defined in `__init__` to leverage key-sharing optimization

```
class
```

Examples [22-15](#ex_schedule_v4_hasattr) and [22-16](#ex_schedule_v4) illustrate simple caching techniques that are fairly common in legacy Python codebases. However, in multithreaded programs, handmade caches like those introduce race conditions that may lead to corrupted data. If two threads are reading a property that was not previously cached, the first thread will need to compute the data for the cache attribute (`__speaker_objs` in the examples) and the second thread may read a cached value that is not yet complete.

Fortunately, Python 3.8 introduced the `@functools.cached_property` decorator, which is thread safe. Unfortunately, it comes with a couple of caveats, explained next.