## Step 3: Property Overriding an Existing Attribute

The name of the `venue` property in [Example 22-12](#ex_schedule_v2_event) does not match a field name in records of the `"events"` collection. Its data comes from a `venue_serial` field name. In contrast, each record in the `events` collection has a `speakers` field with a list of serial numbers. We want to expose that information as a `speakers` property in `Event` instances, which returns a list of `Record` instances. This name clash requires some special attention, as [Example 22-14](#ex_schedule_v3_speakers) reveals.

##### Example 22-14. schedule_v3.py: the `speakers` property

```
    
```

[![^1]

The data we want is in a `speakers` attribute, but we must retrieve it directly from the instance `__dict__` to avoid a recursive call to the `speakers` property.

[![^2]

Return a list of all records with keys corresponding to the numbers in `spkr_serials`.

Inside the `speakers` method, trying to read `self.speakers` will invoke the property itself, quickly raising a `RecursionError`. However, if we read the same data via `self.__dict__['speakers']`, Python’s usual algorithm for retrieving attributes is bypassed, the property is not called, and the recursion is avoided. For this reason, reading or writing data directly to an object’s `__dict__` is a common Python metaprogramming trick.

###### Warning

The interpreter evaluates `obj.my_attr` by first looking at the class of `obj`. If the class has a property with the `my_attr` name, that property shadows an instance attribute by the same name. Examples in [“Properties Override Instance Attributes”](#prop_override_instance) will demonstrate this, and [Chapter 23](ch23.html#attribute_descriptors) will reveal that a property is implemented as a descriptor—a more powerful and general abstraction.

As I coded the list comprehension in [Example 22-14](#ex_schedule_v3_speakers), my programmer’s lizard brain thought: “This may be expensive.” Not really, because events in the OSCON dataset have few speakers, so coding anything more complicated would be premature optimization. However, caching a property is a common need—and there are caveats. So let’s see how to do that in the next examples.