## Step 1: Data-Driven Attribute Creation

[Example 22-8](#ex_schedule_v1_demo) shows the doctest to guide this first step.

##### Example 22-8. Test-driving schedule_v1.py (from [Example 22-9](#ex_schedule_v1))

```
    
```

[![^1]

`load` a `dict` with the JSON data.

[![^2]

The keys in `records` are strings built from the record type and serial number.

[![^3]

`speaker` is an instance of the `Record` class defined in [Example 22-9](#ex_schedule_v1).

[![^4]

Fields from the original JSON can be retrieved as `Record` instance attributes.

The code for _schedule_v1.py_ is in [Example 22-9](#ex_schedule_v1).

##### Example 22-9. schedule_v1.py: reorganizing the OSCON schedule data

```
import
```

[![^1]

This is a common shortcut to build an instance with attributes created from keyword arguments (detailed explanation follows).

[![^2]

Use the `serial` field to build the custom `Record` representation shown in [Example 22-8](#ex_schedule_v1_demo).

[![^3]

`load` will ultimately return a `dict` of `Record` instances.

[![^4]

Parse the JSON, returning native Python objects: lists, dicts, strings, numbers, etc.

[![^5]

Iterate over the four top-level lists named `'conferences'`, `'events'`, `'speakers'`, and `'venues'`.

[![^6]

`record_type` is the list name without the last character, so `speakers` becomes `speaker`. In Python ≥ 3.9 we can do this more explicitly with `collection.removesuffix('s')`—see [PEP 616—String methods to remove prefixes and suffixes](https://fpy.li/pep616).

[![^7]

Build the `key` in the format `'speaker.3471'`.

[![^8]

Create a `Record` instance and save it in `records` with the `key`.

The `Record.__init__` method illustrates an old Python hack. Recall that the `__dict__` of an object is where its attributes are kept—unless `__slots__` is declared in the class, as we saw in [“Saving Memory with __slots__”](ch11.html#slots_section). So, updating an instance `__dict__` with a mapping is a quick way to create a bunch of attributes in that instance.[^7]

###### Note

Depending on the application, the `Record` class may need to deal with keys that are not valid attribute names, as we saw in [“The Invalid Attribute Name Problem”](#dynamic_names_sec). Dealing with that issue would distract from the key idea of this example, and is not a problem in the dataset we are reading.

The definition of `Record` in [Example 22-9](#ex_schedule_v1) is so simple that you may be wondering why I did not use it before, instead of the more complicated `FrozenJSON`. There are two reasons. First, `FrozenJSON` works by recursively converting the nested mappings and lists; `Record` doesn’t need that because our converted dataset doesn’t have mappings nested in mappings or lists. The records contain only strings, integers, lists of strings, and lists of integers. Second reason: `FrozenJSON` provides access to the embedded `__data` `dict` attributes—which we used to invoke methods like `.keys()`—and now we don’t need that functionality either.

###### Note

The Python standard library provides classes similar to `Record`, where each instance has an arbitrary set of attributes built from keyword arguments given to `__init__`: [`types.SimpleNamespace`](https://fpy.li/22-5), [`argparse.Namespace`](https://fpy.li/22-6), and [`multiprocessing.managers.Namespace`](https://fpy.li/22-7). I wrote the simpler `Record` class to highlight the essential idea: `__init__` updating the instance `__dict__`.

After reorganizing the schedule dataset, we can enhance the `Record` class to automatically retrieve `venue` and `speaker` records referenced in an `event` record. We’ll use properties to do that in the next examples.