### Inspecting a typing.NamedTuple

Now let’s examine a class built with `typing.NamedTuple` ([Example 5-11](#ex_demo_nt)), using the same attributes and annotations as `DemoPlainClass` from [Example 5-10](#ex_demo_plain).

##### Example 5-11. meaning/demo_nt.py: a class built with `typing.NamedTuple`

```
import
```

[![^1]

`a` becomes an annotation and also an instance attribute.

[![^2]

`b` is another annotation, and also becomes an instance attribute with default value `1.1`.

[![^3]

`c` is just a plain old class attribute; no annotation will refer to it.

Inspecting the `DemoNTClass`, we get:

```
>>> 
```

Here we have the same annotations for `a` and `b` as we saw in [Example 5-10](#ex_demo_plain). But `typing.NamedTuple` creates `a` and `b` class attributes. The `c` attribute is just a plain class attribute with the value `'spam'`.

The `a` and `b` class attributes are _descriptors_—an advanced feature covered in [Chapter 23](ch23.html#attribute_descriptors). For now, think of them as similar to property getters: methods that don’t require the explicit call operator `()` to retrieve an instance attribute. In practice, this means `a` and `b` will work as read-only instance attributes—which makes sense when we recall that `DemoNTClass` instances are just fancy tuples, and tuples are immutable.

`DemoNTClass` also gets a custom docstring:

```
>>> 
```

Let’s inspect an instance of `DemoNTClass`:

```
>>> 
```

To construct `nt`, we need to give at least the `a` argument to `DemoNTClass`. The constructor also takes a `b` argument, but it has a default value of `1.1`, so it’s optional. The `nt` object has the `a` and `b` attributes as expected; it doesn’t have a `c` attribute, but Python retrieves it from the class, as usual.

If you try to assign values to `nt.a`, `nt.b`, `nt.c`, or even `nt.z`, you’ll get `Attribute​Error` exceptions with subtly different error messages. Try that and reflect on the messages.