### Inspecting a class decorated with dataclass

Now, we’ll examine [Example 5-12](#ex_demo_dc).

##### Example 5-12. meaning/demo_dc.py: a class decorated with `@dataclass`

```
from
```

[![^1]

`a` becomes an annotation and also an instance attribute controlled by a descriptor.

[![^2]

`b` is another annotation, and also becomes an instance attribute with a descriptor and a default value `1.1`.

[![^3]

`c` is just a plain old class attribute; no annotation will refer to it.

Now let’s check out `__annotations__`, `__doc__`, and the `a`, `b`, `c` attributes on `Demo​DataClass`:

```
>>> 
```

The `__annotations__` and `__doc__` are not surprising. However, there is no attribute named `a` in `DemoDataClass`—in contrast with `DemoNTClass` from [Example 5-11](#ex_demo_nt), which has a descriptor to get `a` from the instances as read-only attributes (that mysterious `<_collections._tuplegetter>`). That’s because the `a` attribute will only exist in instances of `DemoDataClass`. It will be a public attribute that we can get and set, unless the class is frozen. But `b` and `c` exist as class attributes, with `b` holding the default value for the `b` instance attribute, while `c` is just a class attribute that will not be bound to the instances.

Now let’s see how a `DemoDataClass` instance looks:

```
>>> 
```

Again, `a` and `b` are instance attributes, and `c` is a class attribute we get via the instance.

As mentioned, `DemoDataClass` instances are mutable—and no type checking is done at runtime:

```
>>> 
```

We can do even sillier assignments:

```
>>> 
```

Now the `dc` instance has a `c` attribute—but that does not change the `c` class attribute. And we can add a new `z` attribute. This is normal Python behavior: regular instances can have their own attributes that don’t appear in the class.[^7]