## The Meaning of Variable Annotations

We saw in [“No Runtime Effect”](#no_runtime_effect_sec) that type hints have no effect at runtime. But at import time—when a module is loaded—Python does read them to build the `__annotations__` dictionary that `typing.NamedTuple` and `@dataclass` then use to enhance the class.

We’ll start this exploration with a simple class in [Example 5-10](#ex_demo_plain), so that we can later see what extra features are added by `typing.NamedTuple` and `@dataclass`.

##### Example 5-10. meaning/demo_plain.py: a plain class with type hints

```
class
```

[![^1]

`a` becomes an entry in `__annotations__`, but is otherwise discarded: no attribute named `a` is created in the class.

[![^2]

`b` is saved as an annotation, and also becomes a class attribute with value `1.1`.

[![^3]

`c` is just a plain old class attribute, not an annotation.

We can verify that in the console, first reading the `__annotations__` of the `DemoPlainClass`, then trying to get its attributes named `a`, `b`, and `c`:

```
>>> 
```

Note that the `__annotations__` special attribute is created by the interpreter to record the type hints that appear in the source code—even in a plain class.

The `a` survives only as an annotation. It doesn’t become a class attribute because no value is bound to it.[^6] The `b` and `c` are stored as class attributes because they are bound to values.

None of those three attributes will be in a new instance of `DemoPlainClass`. If you create an object `o = DemoPlainClass()`, `o.a` will raise `AttributeError`, while `o.b` and `o.c` will retrieve the class attributes with values `1.1` and `'spam'`—that’s just normal Python object behavior.