## Tkinter: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly

Most advice in the previous section is not followed by Tkinter, with the notable exception of [“Provide Aggregate Classes to Users”](#aggregate_class_sec). Even then, it’s not a great example, because composition would probably work better for integrating the geometry managers into `Widget`, as discussed in [“Favor Object Composition over Class Inheritance”](#favor_composition_sec).

Keep in mind that Tkinter has been part of the standard library since Python 1.1 was released in 1994. Tkinter is a layer on top of the excellent Tk GUI toolkit of the Tcl language. The Tcl/Tk combo is not originally object-oriented, so the Tk API is basically a vast catalog of functions. However, the toolkit is object-oriented in its design, if not in its original Tcl implementation.

The docstring of `tkinter.Widget` starts with the words “Internal class.” This suggests that `Widget` should probably be an ABC. Although `Widget` has no methods of its own, it does define an interface. Its message is: “You can count on every Tkinter widget providing basic widget methods (`__init__`, `destroy`, and dozens of Tk API functions), in addition to the methods of all three geometry managers.” We can agree that this is not a great interface definition (it’s just too broad), but it is an interface, and `Widget` “defines” it as the union of the interfaces of its superclasses.

The `Tk` class, which encapsulates the GUI application logic, inherits from `Wm` and `Misc`, neither of which are abstract or mixin (`Wm` is not a proper mixin because `TopLevel` subclasses only from it). The name of the `Misc` class is—by itself—a very strong _code smell_. `Misc` has more than 100 methods, and all widgets inherit from it. Why is it necessary that every single widget has methods for clipboard handling, text selection, timer management, and the like? You can’t really paste into a button or select text from a scrollbar. `Misc` should be split into several specialized mixin classes, and not all widgets should inherit from every one of those mixins.

To be fair, as a Tkinter user, you don’t need to know or use multiple inheritance at all. It’s an implementation detail hidden behind the widget classes that you will instantiate or subclass in your own code. But you will suffer the consequences of excessive multiple inheritance when you type `dir(tkinter.Button)` and try to find the method you need among the 214 attributes listed. And you’ll need to face the complexity if you decide to implement a new Tk widget.

###### Tip

Despite the problems, Tkinter is stable, flexible, and provides a modern look-and-feel if you use the `tkinter.ttk` package and its themed widgets. Also, some of the original widgets, like `Canvas` and `Text`, are incredibly powerful. You can turn a `Canvas` object into a simple drag-and-drop drawing application in a matter of hours. Tkinter and Tcl/Tk are definitely worth a look if you are interested in GUI programming.

This concludes our tour through the labyrinth of inheritance.