## The contextlib Utilities

Before rolling your own context manager classes, take a look at [`contextlib`—“Utilities for `with`-statement contexts”](https://fpy.li/18-9) in the Python documentation. Maybe what you are about to build already exists, or there is a class or some callable that will make your job easier.

Besides the `redirect_stdout` context manager mentioned right after [Example 18-3](#looking_glass_ex), `redirect_stderr` was added in Python 3.5—it does the same as the former, but for output directed to `stderr`.

The `contextlib` package also includes:

`closing`

A function to build context managers out of objects that provide a `close()` method but don’t implement the `__enter__/__exit__` interface.

`suppress`

A context manager to temporarily ignore exceptions given as arguments.

`nullcontext`

A context manager that does nothing, to simplify conditional logic around objects that may not implement a suitable context manager. It serves as a stand-in when conditional code before the `with` block may or may not provide a context manager for the `with` statement—added in Python 3.7.

The `contextlib` module provides classes and a decorator that are more widely applicable than the decorators just mentioned:

`@contextmanager`

A decorator that lets you build a context manager from a simple generator function, instead of creating a class and implementing the interface. See [“Using @contextmanager”](#using_cm_decorator_sec).

`AbstractContextManager`

An ABC that formalizes the context manager interface, and makes it a bit easier to create context manager classes by subclassing—added in Python 3.6.

`ContextDecorator`

A base class for defining class-based context managers that can also be used as function decorators, running the entire function within a managed context.

`ExitStack`

A context manager that lets you enter a variable number of context managers. When the `with` block ends, `ExitStack` calls the stacked context managers’ `__exit__` methods in LIFO order (last entered, first exited). Use this class when you don’t know beforehand how many context managers you need to enter in your `with` block; for example, when opening all files from an arbitrary list of files at the same time.

With Python 3.7, `contextlib` added `AbstractAsyncContextManager`, `@asynccontextmanager`, and `AsyncExitStack`. They are similar to the equivalent utilities without the `async` part of the name, but designed for use with the new `async with` statement, covered in [Chapter 21](ch21.html#async_ch).

The most widely used of these utilities is the `@contextmanager` decorator, so it deserves more attention. That decorator is also interesting because it shows a use for the `yield` statement unrelated to iteration.