## Using @contextmanager

The `@contextmanager` decorator is an elegant and practical tool that brings together three distinctive Python features: a function decorator, a generator, and the `with` statement.

Using `@contextmanager` reduces the boilerplate of creating a context manager: instead of writing a whole class with `__enter__/__exit__` methods, you just implement a generator with a single `yield` that should produce whatever you want the `__enter__` method to return.

In a generator decorated with `@contextmanager`, `yield` splits the body of the function in two parts: everything before the `yield` will be executed at the beginning of the `with` block when the interpreter calls `__enter__`; the code after `yield` will run when `__exit__` is called at the end of the block.

[Example 18-5](#looking_glass_gen_ex) replaces the `LookingGlass` class from [Example 18-3](#looking_glass_ex) with a generator function.

##### Example 18-5. mirror_gen.py: a context manager implemented with a generator

```
import
```

[![^1]

Apply the `contextmanager` decorator.

[![^2]

Preserve the original `sys.stdout.write` method.

[![^3]

`reverse_write` can call `original_write` later because it is available in its closure.

[![^4]

Replace `sys.stdout.write` with `reverse_write`.

[![^5]

Yield the value that will be bound to the target variable in the `as` clause of the `with` statement. The generator pauses at this point while the body of the `with` executes.

[![^6]

When control exits the `with` block, execution continues after the `yield`; here the original `sys.stdout.write` is restored.

[Example 18-6](#looking_glass_gen_demo) shows the `looking_glass` function in operation.

##### Example 18-6. Test-driving the `looking_glass` context manager function

```
    
```

[![^1]

The only difference from [Example 18-2](#looking_glass_demo_1) is the name of the context manager: `looking_glass` instead of `LookingGlass`.

The `contextlib.contextmanager` decorator wraps the function in a class that implements the `__enter__` and `__exit__` methods.[^3]

The `__enter__` method of that class:

1. Calls the generator function to get a generator object—let’s call it `gen`.
    
2. Calls `next(gen)` to drive it to the `yield` keyword.
    
3. Returns the value yielded by `next(gen)`, to allow the user to bind it to a variable in the `with/as` form.
    

When the `with` block terminates, the `__exit__` method:

1. Checks whether an exception was passed as `exc_type`; if so, `gen.throw(exception)` is invoked, causing the exception to be raised in the `yield` line inside the generator function body.
    
2. Otherwise, `next(gen)` is called, resuming the execution of the generator function body after the `yield`.
    

[Example 18-5](#looking_glass_gen_ex) has a flaw: if an exception is raised in the body of the `with` block, the Python interpreter will catch it and raise it again in the `yield` expression inside `looking_glass`. But there is no error handling there, so the `looking_glass` generator will terminate without ever restoring the original `sys.stdout.write` method, leaving the system in an invalid state.

[Example 18-7](#looking_glass_gen_exc_ex) adds special handling of the `ZeroDivisionError` exception, making it functionally equivalent to the class-based [Example 18-3](#looking_glass_ex).

##### Example 18-7. mirror_gen_exc.py: generator-based context manager implementing exception handling—same external behavior as [Example 18-3](#looking_glass_ex)

```
import
```

[![^1]

Create a variable for a possible error message; this is the first change in relation to [Example 18-5](#looking_glass_gen_ex).

[![^2]

Handle `ZeroDivisionError` by setting an error message.

[![^3]

Undo monkey-patching of `sys.stdout.write`.

[![^4]

Display error message, if it was set.

Recall that the `__exit__` method tells the interpreter that it has handled the exception by returning a truthy value; in that case, the interpreter suppresses the exception. On the other hand, if `__exit__` does not explicitly return a value, the interpreter gets the usual `None`, and propagates the exception. With `@contextmanager`, the default behavior is inverted: the `__exit__` method provided by the decorator assumes any exception sent into the generator is handled and should be suppressed.

###### Tip

Having a `try/finally` (or a `with` block) around the `yield` is an unavoidable price of using `@contextmanager`, because you never know what the users of your context manager are going to do inside the `with` block.[^4]

A little-known feature of `@contextmanager` is that the generators decorated with it can also be used as decorators themselves.[^5] That happens because `@contextmanager` is implemented with the `contextlib.ContextDecorator` class.

[Example 18-8](#looking_glass_gen_deco_demo) shows the `looking_glass` context manager from [Example 18-5](#looking_glass_gen_ex) used as decorator.

##### Example 18-8. The `looking_glass` context manager also works as a decorator

```
    
```

[![^1]

`looking_glass` does its job before and after the body of `verse` runs.

[![^2]

This confirms that the original `sys.write` was restored.

Contrast [Example 18-8](#looking_glass_gen_deco_demo) with [Example 18-6](#looking_glass_gen_demo), where `looking_glass` is used as a context manager.

An interesting real-life example of `@contextmanager` outside of the standard library is Martijn Pieters’ [in-place file rewriting using a context manager](https://fpy.li/18-11). [Example 18-9](#inplace_ex) shows how it’s used.

##### Example 18-9. A context manager for rewriting files in place

```
import
```

The `inplace` function is a context manager that gives you two handles—`infh` and `outfh` in the example—to the same file, allowing your code to read and write to it at the same time. It’s easier to use than the standard library’s [`fileinput.input` function](https://fpy.li/18-12) (which also provides a context manager, by the way).

If you want to study Martijn’s `inplace` source code (listed in [the post](https://fpy.li/18-11)), find the `yield` keyword: everything before it deals with setting up the context, which entails creating a backup file, then opening and yielding references to the readable and writable file handles that will be returned by the `__enter__` call. The `__exit__` processing after the `yield` closes the file handles and restores the file from the backup if something went wrong.

This concludes our overview of the `with` statement and context managers. Let’s turn to `match/case` in the context of a complete example.