# Context Managers and with Blocks

Context manager objects exist to control a `with` statement, just like iterators exist to control a `for` statement.

The `with` statement was designed to simplify some common uses of `try/finally`, which guarantees that some operation is performed after a block of code, even if the block is terminated by `return`, an exception, or a `sys.exit()` call. The code in the `finally` clause usually releases a critical resource or restores some previous state that was temporarily changed.

The Python community is finding new, creative uses for context managers. Some examples from the standard library are:

- Managing transactions in the `sqlite3` module—see [“Using the connection as a context manager”](https://fpy.li/18-2).
    
- Safely handling locks, conditions, and semaphores—as described in the [`threading` module documentation](https://fpy.li/18-3).
    
- Setting up custom environments for arithmetic operations with `Decimal` objects—see the [`decimal.localcontext` documentation](https://fpy.li/18-4).
    
- Patching objects for testing—see the [`unittest.mock.patch` function](https://fpy.li/18-5).
    

The context manager interface consists of the `__enter__` and `__exit__` methods. At the top of the `with`, Python calls the `__enter__` method of the context manager object. When the `with` block completes or terminates for any reason, Python calls `__exit__` on the context manager object.

The most common example is making sure a file object is closed. [Example 18-1](#with_file_demo) is a detailed demonstration of using `with` to close a file.

##### Example 18-1. Demonstration of a file object as a context manager

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`fp` is bound to the opened text file because the file’s `__enter__` method returns `self`.

[![^2]

Read `60` Unicode characters from `fp`.

[![^3]

The `fp` variable is still available—`with` blocks don’t define a new scope, as functions do.

[![^4]

We can read the attributes of the `fp` object.

[![^5]

But we can’t read more text from `fp` because at the end of the `with` block, the `TextIOWrapper.__exit__` method was called, and it closed the file.

The first callout in [Example 18-1](#with_file_demo) makes a subtle but crucial point: the context manager object is the result of evaluating the expression after `with`, but the value bound to the target variable (in the `as` clause) is the result returned by the `__enter__` method of the context manager object.

It just happens that the `open()` function returns an instance of `TextIOWrapper`, and its `__enter__` method returns `self`. But in a different class, the `__enter__` method may also return some other object instead of the context manager instance.

When control flow exits the `with` block in any way, the `__exit__` method is invoked on the context manager object, not on whatever was returned by `__enter__`.

The `as` clause of the `with` statement is optional. In the case of `open`, we always need it to get a reference to the file, so that we can call methods on it. But some context managers return `None` because they have no useful object to give back to the user.

[Example 18-2](#looking_glass_demo_1) shows the operation of a perfectly frivolous context manager designed to highlight the distinction between the context manager and the object returned by its `__enter__` method.

##### Example 18-2. Test-driving the `LookingGlass` context manager class

```
    
```

[![^1]

The context manager is an instance of `LookingGlass`; Python calls `__enter__` on the context manager and the result is bound to `what`.

[![^2]

Print a `str`, then the value of the target variable `what`. The output of each `print` will come out reversed.

[![^3]

Now the `with` block is over. We can see that the value returned by `__enter__`, held in `what`, is the string `'JABBERWOCKY'`.

[![^4]

Program output is no longer reversed.

[Example 18-3](#looking_glass_ex) shows the implementation of `LookingGlass`.

##### Example 18-3. mirror.py: code for the `LookingGlass` context manager class

```
import
```

[![^1]

Python invokes `__enter__` with no arguments besides `self`.

[![^2]

Hold the original `sys.stdout.write` method, so we can restore it later.

[![^3]

Monkey-patch `sys.stdout.write`, replacing it with our own method.

[![^4]

Return the `'JABBERWOCKY'` string just so we have something to put in the target variable `what`.

[![^5]

Our replacement to `sys.stdout.write` reverses the `text` argument and calls the original implementation.

[![^6]

Python calls `__exit__` with `None, None, None` if all went well; if an exception is raised, the three arguments get the exception data, as described after this example.

[![^7]

Restore the original method to `sys.stdout.write`.

[![^8]

If the exception is not `None` and its type is `ZeroDivisionError`, print a message…

[![^9]

…and return `True` to tell the interpreter that the exception was handled.

[![^10]

If `__exit__` returns `None` or any _falsy_ value, any exception raised in the `with` block will be propagated.

###### Tip

When real applications take over standard output, they often want to replace `sys.stdout` with another file-like object for a while, then switch back to the original. The [`contextlib.redirect_stdout`](https://fpy.li/18-6) context manager does exactly that: just pass it the file-like object that will stand in for `sys.stdout`.

The interpreter calls the `__enter__` method with no arguments—beyond the implicit `self`. The three arguments passed to `__exit__` are:

`exc_type`

The exception class (e.g., `ZeroDivisionError`).

`exc_value`

The exception instance. Sometimes, parameters passed to the exception constructor—such as the error message—can be found in `exc_value.args`.

`traceback`

A `traceback` object.[^2]

For a detailed look at how a context manager works, see [Example 18-4](#looking_glass_demo_2), where `LookingGlass` is used outside of a `with` block, so we can manually call its `__enter__` and `__exit__` methods.

##### Example 18-4. Exercising `LookingGlass` without a `with` block

```
    
```

[![^1]

Instantiate and inspect the `manager` instance.

[![^2]

Call the manager’s `__enter__` method and store result in `monster`.

[![^3]

`monster` is the string `'JABBERWOCKY'`. The `True` identifier appears reversed because all output via `stdout` goes through the `write` method we patched in `__enter__`.

[![^4]

Call `manager.__exit__` to restore the previous `stdout.write`.

# Parenthesized Context Managers in Python 3.10

Python 3.10 adopted [a new, more powerful parser](https://fpy.li/pep617), allowing new syntax beyond what was possible with the older [LL(1) parser](https://fpy.li/18-8). One syntax enhancement was to allow parenthesized context managers, like this:

```
with
```

Prior to 3.10, we’d have to write that as nested `with` blocks.

The standard library includes the `contextlib` package with handy functions, classes, and decorators for building, combining, and using context managers.