# The nonlocal Declaration

Our previous implementation of `make_averager` was not efficient. In [Example 9-8](#ex_average_fn), we stored all the values in the historical series and computed their `sum` every time `averager` was called. A better implementation would only store the total and the number of items so far, and compute the mean from these two numbers.

[Example 9-12](#ex_average_broken) is a broken implementation, just to make a point. Can you see where it breaks?

##### Example 9-12. A broken higher-order function to calculate a running average without keeping all history

```
def
```

If you try [Example 9-12](#ex_average_broken), here is what you get:

```
>>> 
```

The problem is that the statement `count += 1` actually means the same as `count = count + 1`, when `count` is a number or any immutable type. So we are actually assigning to `count` in the body of `averager`, and that makes it a local variable. The same problem affects the `total` variable.

We did not have this problem in [Example 9-8](#ex_average_fn) because we never assigned to the `series` name; we only called `series.append` and invoked `sum` and `len` on it. So we took advantage of the fact that lists are mutable.

But with immutable types like numbers, strings, tuples, etc., all you can do is read, never update. If you try to rebind them, as in `count = count + 1`, then you are implicitly creating a local variable `count`. It is no longer a free variable, and therefore it is not saved in the closure.

To work around this, the `nonlocal` keyword was introduced in Python 3. It lets you declare a variable as a free variable even when it is assigned within the function. If a new value is assigned to a `nonlocal` variable, the binding stored in the closure is changed. A correct implementation of our newest `make_averager` looks like [Example 9-13](#ex_average_fixed).

##### Example 9-13. Calculate a running average without keeping all history (fixed with the use of `nonlocal`)

```
def
```

After studying the use of `nonlocal`, let’s summarize how Python’s variable lookup works.