# Chapter Summary

Dictionaries are a keystone of Python. Over the years, the familiar `{k1: v1, k2: v2}` literal syntax was enhanced to support unpacking with `**`, pattern matching, as well as `dict` comprehensions.

Beyond the basic `dict`, the standard library offers handy, ready-to-use specialized mappings like `defaultdict`, `ChainMap`, and `Counter`, all defined in the `collections` module. With the new `dict` implementation, `OrderedDict` is not as useful as before, but should remain in the standard library for backward compatibility—and has specific characteristics that `dict` doesn’t have, such as taking into account key ordering in `==` comparisons. Also in the `collections` module is the `UserDict`, an easy to use base class to create custom mappings.

Two powerful methods available in most mappings are `setdefault` and `update`. The `setdefault` method can update items holding mutable values—for example, in a `dict` of `list` values—avoiding a second search for the same key. The `update` method allows bulk insertion or overwriting of items from any other mapping, from iterables providing `(key, value)` pairs, and from keyword arguments. Mapping constructors also use `update` internally, allowing instances to be initialized from mappings, iterables, or keyword arguments. Since Python 3.9, we can also use the `|=` operator to update a mapping, and the `|` operator to create a new one from the union of two mappings.

A clever hook in the mapping API is the `__missing__` method, which lets you customize what happens when a key is not found when using the `d[k]` syntax that invokes `__getitem__`.

The `collections.abc` module provides the `Mapping` and `MutableMapping` abstract base classes as standard interfaces, useful for runtime type checking. The `MappingProxyType` from the `types` module creates an immutable façade for a mapping you want to protect from accidental change. There are also ABCs for `Set` and `MutableSet`.

Dictionary views were a great addition in Python 3, eliminating the memory overhead of the Python 2 `.keys()`, `.values()`, and `.items()` methods that built lists duplicating data in the target `dict` instance. In addition, the `dict_keys` and `dict_items` classes support the most useful operators and methods of `frozenset`.