# Pattern Matching with Mappings

The `match/case` statement supports subjects that are mapping objects. Patterns for mappings look like `dict` literals, but they can match instances of any actual or virtual subclass of `collections.abc.Mapping`.[^1]

In [Chapter 2](ch02.html#sequences) we focused on sequence patterns only, but different types of patterns can be combined and nested. Thanks to destructuring, pattern matching is a powerful tool to process records structured like nested mappings and sequences, which we often need to read from JSON APIs and databases with semi-structured schemas, like MongoDB, EdgeDB, or PostgreSQL. [Example 3-2](#dict_match_ex) demonstrates that. The simple type hints in `get_creators` make it clear that it takes a `dict` and returns a `list`.

##### Example 3-2. creator.py: `get_creators()` extracts names of creators from media records

```
def
```

[![^1]

Match any mapping with `'type': 'book', 'api' :2`, and an `'authors'` key mapped to a sequence. Return the items in the sequence, as a new `list`.

[![^2]

Match any mapping with `'type': 'book', 'api' :1`, and an `'author'` key mapped to any object. Return the object inside a `list`.

[![^3]

Any other mapping with `'type': 'book'` is invalid, raise `ValueError`.

[![^4]

Match any mapping with `'type': 'movie'` and a `'director'` key mapped to a single object. Return the object inside a `list`.

[![^5]

Any other subject is invalid, raise `ValueError`.

[Example 3-2](#dict_match_ex) shows some useful practices for handling semi-structured data such as JSON records:

- Include a field describing the kind of record (e.g., `'type': 'movie'`)
    
- Include a field identifying the schema version (e.g., `'api': 2'`) to allow for future evolution of public APIs
    
- Have `case` clauses to handle invalid records of a specific type (e.g., `'book'`), as well as a catch-all
    

Now let’s see how `get_creators` handles some concrete doctests:

```
>>> 
```

Note that the order of the keys in the patterns is irrelevant, even if the subject is an `OrderedDict` as `b2`.

In contrast with sequence patterns, mapping patterns succeed on partial matches. In the doctests, the `b1` and `b2` subjects include a `'title'` key that does not appear in any `'book'` pattern, yet they match.

There is no need to use `**extra` to match extra key-value pairs, but if you want to capture them as a `dict`, you can prefix one variable with `**`. It must be the last in the pattern, and `**_` is forbidden because it would be redundant. A simple example:

```
>>> 
```

In [“Automatic Handling of Missing Keys”](#mappings_flexible_sec) we’ll study `defaultdict` and other mappings where key lookups via `__getitem__` (i.e., `d[key]`) succeed because missing items are created on the fly. In the context of pattern matching, a match succeeds only if the subject already has the required keys at the top of the `match` statement.

###### Tip

The automatic handling of missing keys is not triggered because pattern matching always uses the `d.get(key, sentinel)` method—where the default `sentinel` is a special marker value that cannot occur in user data.

Moving on from syntax and structure, let’s study the API of mappings.