# Immutable Mappings

The mapping types provided by the standard library are all mutable, but you may need to prevent users from changing a mapping by accident. A concrete use case can be found, again, in a hardware programming library like _Pingo_, mentioned in [“The __missing__ Method”](#missing_method): the `board.pins` mapping represents the physical GPIO pins on the device. As such, it’s useful to prevent inadvertent updates to `board.pins` because the hardware can’t be changed via software, so any change in the mapping would make it inconsistent with the physical reality of the device.

The `types` module provides a wrapper class called `MappingProxyType`, which, given a mapping, returns a `mappingproxy` instance that is a read-only but dynamic proxy for the original mapping. This means that updates to the original mapping can be seen in the `mappingproxy`, but changes cannot be made through it. See [Example 3-10](#ex_MappingProxyType) for a brief demonstration.

##### Example 3-10. `MappingProxyType` builds a read-only `mappingproxy` instance from a `dict`

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Items in `d` can be seen through `d_proxy`.

[![^2]

Changes cannot be made through `d_proxy`.

[![^3]

`d_proxy` is dynamic: any change in `d` is reflected.

Here is how this could be used in practice in the hardware programming scenario: the constructor in a concrete `Board` subclass would fill a private mapping with the pin objects, and expose it to clients of the API via a public `.pins` attribute implemented as a `mappingproxy`. That way the clients would not be able to add, remove, or change pins by accident.

Next, we’ll cover views—which allow high-performance operations on a `dict`, without unnecessary copying of data.