# Dictionary Views

The `dict` instance methods `.keys()`, `.values()`, and `.items()` return instances of classes called `dict_keys`, `dict_values`, and `dict_items`, respectively. These dictionary views are read-only projections of the internal data structures used in the `dict` implementation. They avoid the memory overhead of the equivalent Python 2 methods that returned lists duplicating data already in the target `dict`, and they also replace the old methods that returned iterators.

[Example 3-11](#ex_dict_values) shows some basic operations supported by all dictionary views.

##### Example 3-11. The `.values()` method returns a view of the values in a `dict`

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

The `repr` of a view object shows its content.

[![^2]

We can query the `len` of a view.

[![^3]

Views are iterable, so it’s easy to create lists from them.

[![^4]

Views implement `__reversed__`, returning a custom iterator.

[![^5]

We can’t use `[]` to get individual items from a view.

A view object is a dynamic proxy. If the source `dict` is updated, you can immediately see the changes through an existing view. Continuing from [Example 3-11](#ex_dict_values):

```
>>> 
```

The classes `dict_keys`, `dict_values`, and `dict_items` are internal: they are not available via `__builtins__` or any standard library module, and even if you get a reference to one of them, you can’t use it to create a view from scratch in Python code:

```
>>> 
```

The `dict_values` class is the simplest dictionary view—it implements only the `__len__`, `__iter__`, and `__reversed__` special methods. In addition to these methods, `dict_keys` and `dict_items` implement several set methods, almost as many as the `frozenset` class. After we cover sets, we’ll have more to say about `dict_keys` and `dict_items` in [“Set Operations on dict Views”](#set_ops_dict_views_sec).

Now let’s see some rules and tips informed by the way `dict` is implemented under the hood.