# Practical Consequences of How dict Works

The hash table implementation of Python’s `dict` is very efficient, but it’s important to understand the practical effects of this design:

- Keys must be hashable objects. They must implement proper `__hash__` and `__eq__` methods as described in [“What Is Hashable”](#what_is_hashable).
    
- Item access by key is very fast. A `dict` may have millions of keys, but Python can locate a key directly by computing the hash code of the key and deriving an index offset into the hash table, with the possible overhead of a small number of tries to find a matching entry.
    
- Key ordering is preserved as a side effect of a more compact memory layout for `dict` in CPython 3.6, which became an official language feature in 3.7.
    
- Despite its new compact layout, dicts inevitably have a significant memory overhead. The most compact internal data structure for a container would be an array of pointers to the items.[^8] Compared to that, a hash table needs to store more data per entry, and Python needs to keep at least one-third of the hash table rows empty to remain efficient.
    
- To save memory, avoid creating instance attributes outside of the `__init__` method.
    

That last tip about instance attributes comes from the fact that Python’s default behavior is to store instance attributes in a special `__dict__` attribute, which is a `dict` attached to each instance.[^9]. According to PEP 412, this optimization reduces memory use by 10% to 20% for object-oriented programs.

The details of the compact layout and key-sharing optimizations are rather complex. For more, please read [“Internals of sets and dicts”](https://fpy.li/hashint) at [_fluentpython.com_](http://fluentpython.com).

Now let’s dive into sets.