# Five Books in One

I recommend that everyone read [Chapter 1, “The Python Data Model”](ch01.html#data_model). The core audience for this book should not have trouble jumping directly to any part in this book after [Chapter 1](ch01.html#data_model), but often I assume you’ve read preceding chapters in each specific part. Think of Parts [I](part01.html#data_structures_part) through [V](part05.html#metaprog_part) as books within the book.

I tried to emphasize using what is available before discussing how to build your own. For example, in [Part I](part01.html#data_structures_part), [Chapter 2](ch02.html#sequences) covers sequence types that are ready to use, including some that don’t get a lot of attention, like `collections.deque`. Building user-defined sequences is only addressed in [Part III](part03.html#classes_protocols_part), where we also see how to leverage the abstract base classes (ABCs) from `collections.abc`. Creating your own ABCs is discussed even later in [Part III](part03.html#classes_protocols_part), because I believe it’s important to be comfortable using an ABC before writing your own.

This approach has a few advantages. First, knowing what is ready to use can save you from reinventing the wheel. We use existing collection classes more often than we implement our own, and we can give more attention to the advanced usage of available tools by deferring the discussion on how to create new ones. We are also more likely to inherit from existing ABCs than to create a new ABC from scratch. And finally, I believe it is easier to understand the abstractions after you’ve seen them in action.

The downside of this strategy is the forward references scattered throughout the chapters. I hope these will be easier to tolerate now that you know why I chose this path.