## How the Book Is Organized

Here are the main topics in each part of the book:

[Part I, “Data Structures”](part01.html#data_structures_part)

[Chapter 1](ch01.html#data_model) introduces the Python Data Model and explains why the special methods (e.g., `__repr__`) are the key to the consistent behavior of objects of all types. Special methods are covered in more detail throughout the book. The remaining chapters in this part cover the use of collection types: sequences, mappings, and sets, as well as the `str` versus `bytes` split—the cause of much celebration among Python 3 users and much pain for Python 2 users migrating their codebases. Also covered are the high-level class builders in the standard library: named tuple factories and the `@dataclass` decorator. Pattern matching—new in Python 3.10—is covered in sections in Chapters [^2] is about the life cycle of objects: references, mutability, and garbage collection.

[Part II, “Functions as Objects”](part02.html#function_objects_part)

Here we talk about functions as first-class objects in the language: what that means, how it affects some popular design patterns, and how to implement function decorators by leveraging closures. Also covered here is the general concept of callables in Python, function attributes, introspection, parameter annotations, and the new `nonlocal` declaration in Python 3. [Chapter 8](ch08.html#type_hints_in_def_ch) introduces the major new topic of type hints in function signatures.

[Part III, “Classes and Protocols”](part03.html#classes_protocols_part)

Now the focus is on building classes “by hand”—as opposed to using the class builders covered in [Chapter 5](ch05.html#data_class_ch). Like any Object-Oriented (OO) language, Python has its particular set of features that may or may not be present in the language in which you and I learned class-based programming. The chapters explain how to build your own collections, abstract base classes (ABCs), and protocols, as well as how to cope with multiple inheritance, and how to implement operator overloading—when that makes sense. [Chapter 15](ch15.html#more_types_ch) continues the coverage of type hints.

[Part IV, “Control Flow”](part04.html#control_flow_part)

Covered in this part are the language constructs and libraries that go beyond traditional control flow with conditionals, loops, and subroutines. We start with generators, then visit context managers and coroutines, including the challenging but powerful new `yield from` syntax. [Chapter 18](ch18.html#with_match_ch) includes a significant example using pattern matching in a simple but functional language interpreter. [Chapter 19, “Concurrency Models in Python”](ch19.html#concurrency_models_ch) is a new chapter presenting an overview of alternatives for concurrent and parallel processing in Python, their limitations, and how software architecture allows Python to operate at web scale. I rewrote the chapter about _asynchronous programming_ to emphasize core language features—e.g., `await`, `async dev`, `async for`, and `async with`, and show how they are used with _asyncio_ and other frameworks.

[Part V, “Metaprogramming”](part05.html#metaprog_part)

This part starts with a review of techniques for building classes with attributes created dynamically to handle semi-structured data, such as JSON datasets. Next, we cover the familiar properties mechanism, before diving into how object attribute access works at a lower level in Python using descriptors. The relationship among functions, methods, and descriptors is explained. Throughout [Part V](part05.html#metaprog_part), the step-by-step implementation of a field validation library uncovers subtle issues that lead to the advanced tools of the final chapter: class decorators and metaclasses.