## Memory Views

The built-in `memoryview` class is a shared-memory sequence type that lets you handle slices of arrays without copying bytes. It was inspired by the NumPy library (which we’ll discuss shortly in [“NumPy”](#numpy_sec)). Travis Oliphant, lead author of NumPy, answers the question, [“When should a memoryview be used?”](https://fpy.li/2-17) like this:

> A memoryview is essentially a generalized NumPy array structure in Python itself (without the math). It allows you to share memory between data-structures (things like PIL 0-Assets/Epubook/Fluent%20Python%20Clear,%20Concise,%20and%20Effective%20Programming/images, SQLite databases, NumPy arrays, etc.) without first copying. This is very important for large data sets.

Using notation similar to the `array` module, the `memoryview.cast` method lets you change the way multiple bytes are read or written as units without moving bits around. `memoryview.cast` returns yet another `memoryview` object, always sharing the same memory.

[Example 2-20](#ex_memoryview_demo) shows how to create alternate views on the same array of 6 bytes, to operate on it as a 2×3 matrix or a 3×2 matrix.

##### Example 2-20. Handling 6 bytes of memory as 1×6, 2×3, and 3×2 views

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Build array of 6 bytes (typecode `'B'`).

[![^2]

Build `memoryview` from that array, then export it as a list.

[![^3]

Build new `memoryview` from that previous one, but with `2` rows and `3` columns.

[![^4]

Yet another `memoryview`, now with `3` rows and `2` columns.

[![^5]

Overwrite byte in `m2` at row `1`, column `1` with `22`.

[![^6]

Overwrite byte in `m3` at row `1`, column `1` with `33`.

[![^7]

Display original array, proving that the memory was shared among `octets`, `m1`, `m2`, and `m3`.

The awesome power of `memoryview` can also be used to corrupt. [Example 2-21](#ex_memoryview_evil_demo) shows how to change a single byte of an item in an array of 16-bit integers.

##### Example 2-21. Changing the value of a 16-bit integer array item by poking one of its bytes

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Build `memoryview` from array of 5 16-bit signed integers (typecode `'h'`).

[![^2]

`memv` sees the same 5 items in the array.

[![^3]

Create `memv_oct` by casting the elements of `memv` to bytes (typecode `'B'`).

[![^4]

Export elements of `memv_oct` as a list of 10 bytes, for inspection.

[![^5]

Assign value `4` to byte offset `5`.

[![^6]

Note the change to `numbers`: a `4` in the most significant byte of a 2-byte unsigned integer is `1024`.

###### Note

You’ll find an example of inspecting `memoryview` with the `struct` package at [_fluentpython.com_](http://fluentpython.com): [“Parsing binary records with struct”](https://fpy.li/2-18).

Meanwhile, if you are doing advanced numeric processing in arrays, you should be using the NumPy libraries. We’ll take a brief look at them right away.