## Deques and Other Queues

The `.append` and `.pop` methods make a `list` usable as a stack or a queue (if you use `.append` and `.pop(0)`, you get FIFO behavior). But inserting and removing from the head of a list (the 0-index end) is costly because the entire list must be shifted in memory.

The class `collections.deque` is a thread-safe double-ended queue designed for fast inserting and removing from both ends. It is also the way to go if you need to keep a list of “last seen items” or something of that nature, because a `deque` can be bounded—i.e., created with a fixed maximum length. If a bounded `deque` is full, when you add a new item, it discards an item from the opposite end. [Example 2-23](#ex_deque) shows some typical operations performed on a `deque`.

##### Example 2-23. Working with a `deque`

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

The optional `maxlen` argument sets the maximum number of items allowed in this instance of `deque`; this sets a read-only `maxlen` instance attribute.

[![^2]

Rotating with `n > 0` takes items from the right end and prepends them to the left; when `n < 0` items are taken from left and appended to the right.

[![^3]

Appending to a `deque` that is full (`len(d) == d.maxlen`) discards items from the other end; note in the next line that the `0` is dropped.

[![^4]

Adding three items to the right pushes out the leftmost `-1`, `1`, and `2`.

[![^5]

Note that `extendleft(iter)` works by appending each successive item of the `iter` argument to the left of the `deque`, therefore the final position of the items is reversed.

[Table 2-4](#list_x_deque_methods_tbl) compares the methods that are specific to `list` and `deque` (removing those that also appear in `object`).

Note that `deque` implements most of the `list` methods, and adds a few that are specific to its design, like `popleft` and `rotate`. But there is a hidden cost: removing items from the middle of a `deque` is not as fast. It is really optimized for appending and popping from the ends.

The `append` and `popleft` operations are atomic, so `deque` is safe to use as a FIFO queue in multithreaded applications without the need for locks.

Table 2-4. Methods implemented in `list` or `deque` (those that are also implemented by `object` are omitted for brevity)
||list|deque||
|---|---|---|---|
|`s.__add__(s2)`|●||`s + s2`—concatenation|
|`s.__iadd__(s2)`|●|●|`s += s2`—in-place concatenation|
|`s.append(e)`|●|●|Append one element to the right (after last)|
|`s.appendleft(e)`||●|Append one element to the left (before first)|
|`s.clear()`|●|●|Delete all items|
|`s.__contains__(e)`|●||`e in s`|
|`s.copy()`|●||Shallow copy of the list|
|`s.__copy__()`||●|Support for `copy.copy` (shallow copy)|
|`s.count(e)`|●|●|Count occurrences of an element|
|`s.__delitem__(p)`|●|●|Remove item at position `p`|
|`s.extend(i)`|●|●|Append items from iterable `i` to the right|
|`s.extendleft(i)`||●|Append items from iterable `i` to the left|
|`s.__getitem__(p)`|●|●|`s[p]`—get item or slice at position|
|`s.index(e)`|●||Find position of first occurrence of `e`|
|`s.insert(p, e)`|●||Insert element `e` before the item at position `p`|
|`s.__iter__()`|●|●|Get iterator|
|`s.__len__()`|●|●|`len(s)`—number of items|
|`s.__mul__(n)`|●||`s * n`—repeated concatenation|
|`s.__imul__(n)`|●||`s *= n`—in-place repeated concatenation|
|`s.__rmul__(n)`|●||`n * s`—reversed repeated concatenation[a](ch02.html#idm46582499545088)|
|`s.pop()`|●|●|Remove and return last item[b](ch02.html#idm46582499540784)|
|`s.popleft()`||●|Remove and return first item|
|`s.remove(e)`|●|●|Remove first occurrence of element `e` by value|
|`s.reverse()`|●|●|Reverse the order of the items in place|
|`s.__reversed__()`|●|●|Get iterator to scan items from last to first|
|`s.rotate(n)`||●|Move `n` items from one end to the other|
|`s.__setitem__(p, e)`|●|●|`s[p] = e`—put `e` in position `p`, overwriting existing item or slice|
|`s.sort([key], [reverse])`|●||Sort items in place with optional keyword arguments `key` and `reverse`|
|[a](ch02.html#idm46582499545088-marker) Reversed operators are explained in [Chapter 16](ch16.html#operator_overloading).<br><br>[b](ch02.html#idm46582499540784-marker) `a_list.pop(p)` allows removing from position `p`, but `deque` does not support that option.|   |   |   |

Besides `deque`, other Python standard library packages implement queues:

`queue`

This provides the synchronized (i.e., thread-safe) classes `SimpleQueue`, `Queue`, `LifoQueue`, and `PriorityQueue`. These can be used for safe communication between threads. All except `SimpleQueue` can be bounded by providing a `maxsize` argument greater than 0 to the constructor. However, they don’t discard items to make room as `deque` does. Instead, when the queue is full, the insertion of a new item blocks—i.e., it waits until some other thread makes room by taking an item from the queue, which is useful to throttle the number of live threads.

`multiprocessing`

Implements its own unbounded `SimpleQueue` and bounded `Queue`, very similar to those in the `queue` package, but designed for interprocess communication. A specialized `multiprocessing.JoinableQueue` is provided for task management.

`asyncio`

Provides `Queue`, `LifoQueue`, `PriorityQueue`, and `JoinableQueue` with APIs inspired by the classes in the `queue` and `multiprocessing` modules, but adapted for managing tasks in asynchronous programming.

`heapq`

In contrast to the previous three modules, `heapq` does not implement a queue class, but provides functions like `heappush` and `heappop` that let you use a mutable sequence as a heap queue or priority queue.

This ends our overview of alternatives to the `list` type, and also our exploration of sequence types in general—except for the particulars of `str` and binary sequences, which have their own chapter ([Chapter 4](ch04.html#strings_bytes_files)).