# TypedDict

###### Warning

It’s tempting to use `TypedDict` to protect against errors while handling dynamic data structures like JSON API responses. But the examples here make clear that correct handling of JSON must be done at runtime, and not with static type checking. For runtime checking of JSON-like structures using type hints, check out the [_pydantic_](https://fpy.li/15-5) package on PyPI.

Python dictionaries are sometimes used as records, with the keys used as field names and field values of different types.

For example, consider a record describing a book in JSON or Python:

```
{
```

Before Python 3.8, there was no good way to annotate a record like that, because the mapping types we saw in [“Generic Mappings”](ch08.html#mapping_type_sec) limit all values to have the same type.

Here are two lame attempts to annotate a record like the preceding JSON object:

`Dict[str, Any]`

The values may be of any type.

`Dict[str, Union[str, int, List[str]]]`

Hard to read, and doesn’t preserve the relationship between field names and their respective field types: `title` is supposed to be a `str`, it can’t be an `int` or a `List[str]`.

[PEP 589—TypedDict: Type Hints for Dictionaries with a Fixed Set of Keys](https://fpy.li/pep589) addressed that problem. [Example 15-4](#bookdict_ex) shows a simple `TypedDict`.

##### Example 15-4. _books.py_: the `BookDict` definition

```
from
```

At first glance, `typing.TypedDict` may seem like a data class builder, similar to `typing.NamedTuple`—covered in [Chapter 5](ch05.html#data_class_ch).

The syntactic similarity is misleading. `TypedDict` is very different. It exists only for the benefit of type checkers, and has no runtime effect.

`TypedDict` provides two things:

- Class-like syntax to annotate a `dict` with type hints for the value of each “field.”
    
- A constructor that tells the type checker to expect a `dict` with the keys and values as specified.
    

At runtime, a `TypedDict` constructor such as `BookDict` is a placebo: it has the same effect as calling the `dict` constructor with the same arguments.

The fact that `BookDict` creates a plain `dict` also means that:

- The “fields” in the pseudoclass definition don’t create instance attributes.
    
- You can’t write initializers with default values for the “fields.”
    
- Method definitions are not allowed.
    

Let’s explore the behavior of a `BookDict` at runtime ([Example 15-5](#bookdict_first_use_ex)).

##### Example 15-5. Using a `BookDict`, but not quite as intended

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

You can call `BookDict` like a `dict` constructor with keyword arguments, or passing a `dict` argument—including a `dict` literal.

[![^2]

Oops…I forgot `authors` takes a list. But gradual typing means no type checking at runtime.

[![^3]

The result of calling `BookDict` is a plain `dict`…

[![^4]

…therefore you can’t read the data using `object.field` notation.

[![^5]

The type hints are in `BookDict.__annotations__`, and not in `pp`.

Without a type checker, `TypedDict` is as useful as comments: it may help people read the code, but that’s it. In contrast, the class builders from [Chapter 5](ch05.html#data_class_ch) are useful even if you don’t use a type checker, because at runtime they generate or enhance a custom class that you can instantiate. They also provide several useful methods or functions listed in [Table 5-1](ch05.html#builders_compared_tbl).

[Example 15-6](#bookdict_demo_ex) builds a valid `BookDict` and tries some operations on it. This shows how `TypedDict` enables Mypy to catch errors, shown in [Example 15-7](#bookdict_demo_check).

##### Example 15-6. _demo_books.py_: legal and illegal operations on a `BookDict`

```
from
```

[![^1]

Remember to add a return type, so that Mypy doesn’t ignore the function.

[![^2]

This is a valid `BookDict`: all the keys are present, with values of the correct types.

[![^3]

Mypy will infer the type of `authors` from the annotation for the `'authors'` key in `BookDict`.

[![^4]

`typing.TYPE_CHECKING` is only `True` when the program is being type checked. At runtime, it’s always false.

[![^5]

The previous `if` statement prevents `reveal_type(authors)` from being called at runtime. `reveal_type` is not a runtime Python function, but a debugging facility provided by Mypy. That’s why there is no `import` for it. See its output in [Example 15-7](#bookdict_demo_check).

[![^6]

The last three lines of the `demo` function are illegal. They will cause error messages in [Example 15-7](#bookdict_demo_check).

Type checking _demo_books.py_ from [Example 15-6](#bookdict_demo_ex), we get [Example 15-7](#bookdict_demo_check).

##### Example 15-7. Type checking _demo_books.py_

…/typeddict/ $ mypy demo_books.py
demo_books.py:13: note: Revealed type is 'built-ins.list[built-ins.str]'  [![^1]
demo_books.py:14: error: Incompatible types in assignment
                  (expression has type "str", variable has type "List[str]")  [![^2]
demo_books.py:15: error: TypedDict "BookDict" has no key 'weight'  [![^3]
demo_books.py:16: error: Key 'title' of TypedDict "BookDict" cannot be deleted  [![^4]
Found 3 errors in 1 file (checked 1 source file)

[![^1]

This note is the result of `reveal_type(authors)`.

[![^2]

The type of the `authors` variable was inferred from the type of the `book['authors']` expression that initialized it. You can’t assign a `str` to a variable of type `List[str]`. Type checkers usually don’t allow the type of a variable to change.[^3]

[![^3]

Cannot assign to a key that is not part of the `BookDict` definition.

[![^4]

Cannot delete a key that is part of the `BookDict` definition.

Now let’s see `BookDict` used in function signatures, to type check function calls.

Imagine you need to generate XML from book records, similar to this:

```
<BOOK>
```

If you were writing MicroPython code to be embedded in a tiny microcontroller, you might write a function like what’s shown in [Example 15-8](#to_xml_ex).[^4]

##### Example 15-8. _books.py_: `to_xml` function

```
AUTHOR_ELEMENT
```

[![^1]

The whole point of the example: using `BookDict` in the function signature.

[![^2]

It’s often necessary to annotate collections that start empty, otherwise Mypy can’t infer the type of the elements.[^5]

[![^3]

Mypy understands `isinstance` checks, and treats `value` as a `list` in this block.

[![^4]

When I used `key == 'authors'` as the condition for the `if` guarding this block, Mypy found an error in this line: `"object" has no attribute "__iter__"`, because it inferred the type of `value` returned from `book.items()` as `object`, which doesn’t support the `__iter__` method required by the generator expression. With the `isinstance` check, this works because Mypy knows that `value` is a `list` in this block.

[Example 15-9](#from_json_any_ex) shows a function that parses a JSON `str` and returns a `BookDict`.

##### Example 15-9. books_any.py: `from_json` function

```
def
```

[![^1]

The return type of `json.loads()` is `Any`.[^6]

[![^2]

I can return `whatever`—of type `Any`—because `Any` is _consistent-with_ every type, including the declared return type, `BookDict`.

The second point of [Example 15-9](#from_json_any_ex) is very important to keep in mind: Mypy will not flag any problem in this code, but at runtime the value in `whatever` may not conform to the `BookDict` structure—in fact, it may not be a `dict` at all!

If you run Mypy with `--disallow-any-expr`, it will complain about the two lines in the body of `from_json`:

…/typeddict/ $ mypy books_any.py --disallow-any-expr
books_any.py:30: error: Expression has type "Any"
books_any.py:31: error: Expression has type "Any"
Found 2 errors in 1 file (checked 1 source file)

Lines 30 and 31 mentioned in the previous snippet are the body of the `from_json` function. We can silence the type error by adding a type hint to the initialization of the `whatever` variable, as in [Example 15-10](#from_json_ex).

##### Example 15-10. books.py: `from_json` function with variable annotation

```
def
```

[![^1]

`--disallow-any-expr` does not cause errors when an expression of type `Any` is immediately assigned to a variable with a type hint.

[![^2]

Now `whatever` is of type `BookDict`, the declared return type.

###### Warning

Don’t be lulled into a false sense of type safety by [Example 15-10](#from_json_ex)! Looking at the code at rest, the type checker cannot predict that `json.loads()` will return anything that resembles a `BookDict`. Only runtime validation can guarantee that.

Static type checking is unable to prevent errors with code that is inherently dynamic, such as `json.loads()`, which builds Python objects of different types at runtime, as Examples [15-11](#bookdict_demo_not_book_ex), [15-12](#bookdict_demo_not_book_check), and [15-13](#bookdict_demo_not_book_run) demonstrate.

##### Example 15-11. demo_not_book.py: `from_json` returns an invalid `BookDict`, and `to_xml` accepts it

```
from
```

[![^1]

This line does not produce a valid `BookDict`—see the content of `NOT_BOOK_JSON`.

[![^2]

Let’s have Mypy reveal a couple of types.

[![^3]

This should not be a problem: `print` can handle `object` and every other type.

[![^4]

`BookDict` has no `'flavor'` key, but the JSON source does…what will happen?

[![^5]

Remember the signature: `def to_xml(book: BookDict) -> str:`.

[![^6]

What will the XML output look like?

Now we check _demo_not_book.py_ with Mypy ([Example 15-12](#bookdict_demo_not_book_check)).

##### Example 15-12. Mypy report for _demo_not_book.py_, reformatted for clarity

…/typeddict/ $ mypy demo_not_book.py
demo_not_book.py:12: note: Revealed type is
   'TypedDict('books.BookDict', {'isbn': built-ins.str,
                                 'title': built-ins.str,
                                 'authors': built-ins.list[built-ins.str],
                                 'pagecount': built-ins.int})'  [![^1]
demo_not_book.py:13: note: Revealed type is 'built-ins.list[built-ins.str]'  [![^2]
demo_not_book.py:16: error: TypedDict "BookDict" has no key 'flavor'  [![^3]
Found 1 error in 1 file (checked 1 source file)

[![^1]

The revealed type is the nominal type, not the runtime content of `not_book`.

[![^2]

Again, this is the nominal type of `not_book['authors']`, as defined in `BookDict`. Not the runtime type.

[![^3]

This error is for line `print(not_book['flavor'])`: that key does not exist in the nominal type.

Now let’s run _demo_not_book.py_, showing the output in [Example 15-13](#bookdict_demo_not_book_run).

##### Example 15-13. Output of running `demo_not_book.py`

…/typeddict/ $ python3 demo_not_book.py
{'title': 'Andromeda Strain', 'flavor': 'pistachio', 'authors': True}  [![^1]
pistachio  [![^2]
<BOOK>  [![^3]
        <TITLE>Andromeda Strain</TITLE>
        <FLAVOR>pistachio</FLAVOR>
        <AUTHORS>True</AUTHORS>
</BOOK>

[![^1]

This is not really a `BookDict`.

[![^2]

The value of `not_book['flavor']`.

[![^3]

`to_xml` takes a `BookDict` argument, but there is no runtime checking: garbage in, garbage out.

[Example 15-13](#bookdict_demo_not_book_run) shows that _demo_not_book.py_ outputs nonsense, but has no runtime errors. Using a `TypedDict` while handling JSON data did not provide much type safety.

If you look at the code for `to_xml` in [Example 15-8](#to_xml_ex) through the lens of duck typing, the argument `book` must provide an `.items()` method that returns an iterable of tuples like `(key, value)` where:

- `key` must have an `.upper()` method
    
- `value` can be anything
    

The point of this demonstration: when handling data with a dynamic structure, such as JSON or XML, `TypedDict` is absolutely not a replacement for data validation at runtime. For that, use [_pydantic_](https://fpy.li/15-5).

`TypedDict` has more features, including support for optional keys, a limited form of inheritance, and an alternative declaration syntax. If you want to know more about it, please review [PEP 589—TypedDict: Type Hints for Dictionaries with a Fixed Set of Keys](https://fpy.li/pep589).

Now let’s turn our attention to a function that is best avoided, but sometimes is unavoidable: `typing.cast`.