# Type Casting

No type system is perfect, and neither are the static type checkers, the type hints in the _typeshed_ project, or the type hints in the third-party packages that have them.

The `typing.cast()` special function provides one way to handle type checking malfunctions or incorrect type hints in code we can’t fix. The [Mypy 0.930 documentation](https://fpy.li/15-14) explains:

> Casts are used to silence spurious type checker warnings and give the type checker a little help when it can’t quite understand what is going on.

At runtime, `typing.cast` does absolutely nothing. This is its [implementation](https://fpy.li/15-15):

```
def
```

PEP 484 requires type checkers to “blindly believe” the type stated in the `cast`. The [“Casts” section of PEP 484](https://fpy.li/15-16) gives an example where the type checker needs the guidance of `cast`:

```
from
```

The `next()` call on the generator expression will either return the index of a `str` item or raise `StopIteration`. Therefore, `find_first_str` will always return a `str` if no exception is raised, and `str` is the declared return type.

But if the last line were just `return a[index]`, Mypy would infer the return type as `object` because the `a` argument is declared as `list[object]`. So the `cast()` is required to guide Mypy.[^7]

Here is another example with `cast`, this time to correct an outdated type hint for Python’s standard library. In [Example 21-12](ch21.html#tcp_mojifinder_main), I create an _asyncio_ `Server` object and I want to get the address the server is listening to. I coded this line:

```
addr
```

But Mypy reported this error:

Value of type "Optional[List[socket]]" is not indexable

The type hint for `Server.sockets` on _typeshed_ in May 2021 is valid for Python 3.6, where the `sockets` attribute could be `None`. But in Python 3.7, `sockets` became a property with a getter that always returns a `list`—which may be empty if the server has no sockets. And since Python 3.8, the getter returns a `tuple` (used as an immutable sequence).

Since I can’t fix _typeshed_ right now,[^8] I added a `cast`, like this:

```
from
```

Using `cast` in this case required a couple of hours to understand the problem and read _asyncio_ source code to find the correct type of the sockets: the `TransportSocket` class from the undocumented `asyncio.trsock` module. I also had to add two `import` statements and another line of code for readability.[^9] But the code is safer.

The careful reader may note that `sockets[0]` could raise `IndexError` if `sockets` is empty. However, as far as I understand `asyncio`, that cannot happen in [Example 21-12](ch21.html#tcp_mojifinder_main) because the `server` is ready to accept connections by the time I read its `sockets` attribute, therefore it will not be empty. Anyway, `IndexError` is a runtime error. Mypy can’t spot the problem even in a trivial case like `print([][0])`.

###### Warning

Don’t get too comfortable using `cast` to silence Mypy, because Mypy is usually right when it reports an error. If you are using `cast` very often, that’s a [code smell](https://fpy.li/15-20). Your team may be misusing type hints, or you may have low-quality dependencies in your codebase.

Despite the downsides, there are valid uses for `cast`. Here is something Guido van Rossum wrote about it:

> What’s wrong with the occasional `cast()` call or `# type: ignore` comment?[^10]

It is unwise to completely ban the use of `cast`, especially because the other workarounds are worse:

- `# type: ignore` is less informative.[^11]
    
- Using `Any` is contagious: since `Any` is _consistent-with_ all types, abusing it may produce cascading effects through type inference, undermining the type checker’s ability to detect errors in other parts of the code.
    

Of course, not all typing mishaps can be fixed with `cast`. Sometimes we need `# type: ignore`, the occasional `Any`, or even leaving a function without type hints.

Next, let’s talk about using annotations at runtime.