# Implementing a Generic Static Protocol

The Python 3.10 standard library provides a few generic static protocols. One of them is `SupportsAbs`, implemented like this in [the _typing_ module](https://fpy.li/15-34):

```
@runtime_checkable
```

`T_co` is declared according to the naming convention:

```
T_co
```

Thanks to `SupportsAbs`, Mypy recognizes this code as valid, as you can see in [Example 15-21](#ex_abs_demo).

##### Example 15-21. _abs_demo.py_: use of the generic `SupportsAbs` protocol

```
import
```

[![^1]

Defining `__abs__` makes `Vector2d` _consistent-with_ `SupportsAbs`.

[![^2]

Parameterizing `SupportsAbs` with `float` ensures…

[![^3]

…that Mypy accepts `abs(v)` as the first argument for `math.isclose`.

[![^4]

Thanks to `@runtime_checkable` in the definition of `SupportsAbs`, this is a valid runtime assertion.

[![^5]

The remaining code all passes Mypy checks and runtime assertions.

[![^6]

The `int` type is also _consistent-with_ `SupportsAbs`. According to [_typeshed_](https://fpy.li/15-35), `int.__abs__` returns an `int`, which is _consistent-with_ the `float` type parameter declared in the `is_unit` type hint for the `v` argument.

Similarly, we can write a generic version of the `RandomPicker` protocol presented in [Example 13-18](ch13.html#ex_randompick_protocol), which was defined with a single method `pick` returning `Any`.

[Example 15-22](#ex_generic_randompick_protocol) shows how to make a generic `RandomPicker` covariant on the return type of `pick`.

##### Example 15-22. _generic_randompick.py_: definition of generic `RandomPicker`

```
from
```

[![^1]

Declare `T_co` as `covariant`.

[![^2]

This makes `RandomPicker` generic with a covariant formal type parameter.

[![^3]

Use `T_co` as the return type.

The generic `RandomPicker` protocol can be covariant because its only formal parameter is used in a return type.

With this, we can call it a chapter.