# Chapter Summary

The chapter started with a simple example of using `@overload`, followed by a much more complex example that we studied in detail: the overloaded signatures required to correctly annotate the `max` built-in function.

The `typing.TypedDict` special construct came next. I chose to cover it here, and not in [Chapter 5](ch05.html#data_class_ch) where we saw `typing.NamedTuple`, because `TypedDict` is not a class builder; it’s merely a way to add type hints to a variable or argument that requires a `dict` with a specific set of string keys, and specific types for each key—which happens when we use a `dict` as a record, often in the context of handling with JSON data. That section was a bit long because using `TypedDict` can give a false sense of security, and I wanted to show how runtime checks and error handling are really inevitable when trying to make statically structured records out of mappings that are dynamic in nature.

Next we talked about `typing.cast`, a function designed to let us guide the work of the type checker. It’s important to carefully consider when to use `cast`, because overusing it hinders the type checker.

Runtime access to type hints came next. The key point was to use `typing.​get_type_hints` instead of reading the `__annotations__` attribute directly. However, that function may be unreliable with some annotations, and we saw that Python core developers are still working on a way to make type hints usable at runtime, while reducing their impact on CPU and memory usage.

The final sections were about generics, starting with the `LottoBlower` generic class—which we later learned is an invariant generic class. That example was followed by definitions of four basic terms: generic type, formal type parameter, parameterized type, and actual type parameter.

The major topic of variance was presented next, using cafeteria beverage dispensers and trash cans as “real life” examples of invariant, covariant, and contravariant generic types. Next we reviewed, formalized, and further applied those concepts to examples in Python’s standard library.

Lastly, we saw how a generic static protocol is defined, first considering the `typing.SupportsAbs` protocol, and then applying the same idea to the `RandomPicker` example, making it more strict than the original protocol from [Chapter 13](ch13.html#ifaces_prot_abc).

###### Note

Python’s type system is a huge and rapidly evolving subject. This chapter is not comprehensive. I chose to focus on topics that are either widely applicable, particularly challenging, or conceptually important and therefore likely to be relevant for a long time.