## Augmented Assignment with Sequences

The augmented assignment operators `+=` and `*=` behave quite differently, depending on the first operand. To simplify the discussion, we will focus on augmented addition first (`+=`), but the concepts also apply to `*=` and to other augmented assignment operators.

The special method that makes `+=` work is `__iadd__` (for “in-place addition”).

However, if `__iadd__` is not implemented, Python falls back to calling `__add__`. Consider this simple expression:

```
>>> 
```

If `a` implements `__iadd__`, that will be called. In the case of mutable sequences (e.g., `list`, `bytearray`, `array.array`), `a` will be changed in place (i.e., the effect will be similar to `a.extend(b)`). However, when `a` does not implement `__iadd__`, the expression `a += b` has the same effect as `a = a + b`: the expression `a + b` is evaluated first, producing a new object, which is then bound to `a`. In other words, the identity of the object bound to `a` may or may not change, depending on the availability of `__iadd__`.

In general, for mutable sequences, it is a good bet that `__iadd__` is implemented and that `+=` happens in place. For immutable sequences, clearly there is no way for that to happen.

What I just wrote about `+=` also applies to `*=`, which is implemented via `__imul__`. The `__iadd__` and `__imul__` special methods are discussed in [Chapter 16](ch16.html#operator_overloading). Here is a demonstration of `*=` with a mutable sequence and then an immutable one:

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

ID of the initial list.

[![^2]

After multiplication, the list is the same object, with new items appended.

[![^3]

ID of the initial tuple.

[![^4]

After multiplication, a new tuple was created.

Repeated concatenation of immutable sequences is inefficient, because instead of just appending new items, the interpreter has to copy the whole target sequence to create a new one with the new items concatenated.[^8]

We’ve seen common use cases for `+=`. The next section shows an intriguing corner case that highlights what “immutable” really means in the context of tuples.