## Building Lists of Lists

Sometimes we need to initialize a list with a certain number of nested lists—for example, to distribute students in a list of teams or to represent squares on a game board. The best way of doing so is with a list comprehension, as in [Example 2-14](#ex_list_of_lists_ok).

##### Example 2-14. A list with three lists of length 3 can represent a tic-tac-toe board

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Create a list of three lists of three items each. Inspect the structure.

[![^2]

Place a mark in row 1, column 2, and check the result.

A tempting, but wrong, shortcut is doing it like [Example 2-15](#ex_list_of_lists_wrong).

##### Example 2-15. A list with three references to the same list is useless

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

The outer list is made of three references to the same inner list. While it is unchanged, all seems right.

[![^2]

Placing a mark in row 1, column 2, reveals that all rows are aliases referring to the same object.

The problem with [Example 2-15](#ex_list_of_lists_wrong) is that, in essence, it behaves like this code:

```
row
```

[![^1]

The same `row` is appended three times to `board`.

On the other hand, the list comprehension from [Example 2-14](#ex_list_of_lists_ok) is equivalent to this code:

```
>>
```

[![^1]

Each iteration builds a new `row` and appends it to `board`.

[![^2]

Only row 2 is changed, as expected.

###### Tip

If either the problem or the solution in this section is not clear to you, relax. [Chapter 6](ch06.html#mutability_and_references) was written to clarify the mechanics and pitfalls of references and mutable objects.

So far we have discussed the use of the plain `+` and `*` operators with sequences, but there are also the `+=` and `*=` operators, which produce very different results, depending on the mutability of the target sequence. The following section explains how that works.