## Abstract Base Classes

> Be conservative in what you send, be liberal in what you accept.
> 
> Postel’s law, a.k.a. the Robustness Principle

[Table 8-1](#generic_collections_tbl) lists several abstract classes from `collections.abc`. Ideally, a function should accept arguments of those abstract types—or their `typing` equivalents before Python 3.9—and not concrete types. This gives more flexibility to the caller.

Consider this function signature:

```
from
```

Using `abc.Mapping` allows the caller to provide an instance of `dict`, `defaultdict`, `ChainMap`, a `UserDict` subclass, or any other type that is a _subtype-of_ `Mapping`.

In contrast, consider this signature:

```
def
```

Now `color_map` must be a `dict` or one of its subtypes, such as `defaultDict` or `OrderedDict`. In particular, a subclass of `collections.UserDict` would not pass the type check for `color_map`, despite being the recommended way to create user-defined mappings, as we saw in [“Subclassing UserDict Instead of dict”](ch03.html#sublcassing_userdict_sec). Mypy would reject a `UserDict` or an instance of a class derived from it, because `UserDict` is not a subclass of `dict`; they are siblings. Both are subclasses of `abc.MutableMapping`.[^12]

Therefore, in general it’s better to use `abc.Mapping` or `abc.MutableMapping` in parameter type hints, instead of `dict` (or `typing.Dict` in legacy code). If the `name2hex` function doesn’t need to mutate the given `color_map`, the most accurate type hint for `color_map` is `abc.Mapping`. That way, the caller doesn’t need to provide an object that implements methods like `setdefault`, `pop`, and `update`, which are part of the `MutableMapping` interface, but not of `Mapping`. This has to do with the second part of Postel’s law: “Be liberal in what you accept.”

Postel’s law also tells us to be conservative in what we send. The return value of a function is always a concrete object, so the return type hint should be a concrete type, as in the example from [“Generic Collections”](#simple_collections_type_sec)—which uses `list[str]`:

```
def
```

Under the entry of [`typing.List`](https://fpy.li/8-20), the Python documentation says:

> Generic version of `list`. Useful for annotating return types. To annotate arguments it is preferred to use an abstract collection type such as `Sequence` or `Iterable`.

A similar comment appears in the entries for [`typing.Dict`](https://fpy.li/8-21) and [`typing.Set`](https://fpy.li/8-22).

Remember that most ABCs from `collections.abc` and other concrete classes from `collections`, as well as built-in collections, support generic type hint notation like `collections.deque[str]` starting with Python 3.9. The corresponding `typing` collections are only needed to support code written in Python 3.8 or earlier. The full list of classes that became generic appears in the [“Implementation”](https://fpy.li/8-16) section of [PEP 585—Type Hinting Generics In Standard Collections](https://fpy.li/pep585).

To wrap up our discussion of ABCs in type hints, we need to talk about the `numbers` ABCs.