# Further Reading

“Recipe 8.21. Implementing the Visitor Pattern,” in the [_Python Cookbook_, 3rd ed.](https://fpy.li/pycook3), presents an elegant implementation of the Visitor pattern in which a `NodeVisitor` class handles methods as first-class objects.

On the general topic of design patterns, the choice of readings for the Python programmer is not as broad as what is available to other language communities.

_Learning Python Design Patterns_, by Gennadiy Zlobin (Packt), is the only book that I have seen entirely devoted to patterns in Python. But Zlobin’s work is quite short (100 pages) and covers 8 of the original 23 design patterns.

_Expert Python Programming_, by Tarek Ziadé (Packt), is one of the best intermediate-level Python books in the market, and its final chapter, “Useful Design Patterns,” presents several of the classic patterns from a Pythonic perspective.

Alex Martelli has given several talks about Python design patterns. There is a video of his [EuroPython 2011 presentation](https://fpy.li/10-5) and a [set of slides on his personal website](https://fpy.li/10-6). I’ve found different slide decks and videos over the years, of varying lengths, so it is worthwhile to do a thorough search for his name with the words “Python Design Patterns.” A publisher told me Martelli is working on a book about this subject. I will certainly get it when it comes out.

There are many books about design patterns in the context of Java, but among them the one I like most is _Head First Design Patterns_, 2nd ed., by Eric Freeman and Elisabeth Robson (O’Reilly). It explains 16 of the 23 classic patterns. If you like the wacky style of the _Head First_ series and need an introduction to this topic, you will love that work. It is Java-centric, but the second edition was updated to reflect the addition of first-class functions in Java, making some of the examples closer to code we’d write in Python.

For a fresh look at patterns from the point of view of a dynamic language with duck typing and first-class functions, _Design Patterns in Ruby_ by Russ Olsen (Addison-Wesley) has many insights that are also applicable to Python. In spite of their many syntactic differences, at the semantic level Python and Ruby are closer to each other than to Java or C++.

In [“Design Patterns in Dynamic Languages”](https://fpy.li/norvigdp) (slides), Peter Norvig shows how first-class functions (and other dynamic features) make several of the original design patterns either simpler or unnecessary.

The introduction of the original _Design Patterns_ book by Gamma et al. is worth the price of the book—more than the catalog of 23 patterns, which includes recipes ranging from very important to rarely useful. The widely quoted design principles, “Program to an interface, not an implementation” and “Favor object composition over class inheritance,” both come from that introduction.

The application of patterns to design originated with the architect Christopher Alexander et al., presented in the book _A Pattern Language_ (Oxford University Press). Alexander’s idea is to create a standard vocabulary allowing teams to share common design decisions while designing buildings. M. J. Dominus wrote [“‘Design Patterns’ Aren’t”](https://fpy.li/10-7), an intriguing slide deck and postscript text arguing that Alexander’s original vision of patterns is more profound, more human, and also applicable to software engineering.

##### Soapbox

Python has first-class functions and first-class types, features that Norvig claims affect 10 of the 23 patterns (slide 10 of [“Design Patterns in Dynamic Languages”](https://fpy.li/norvigdp)). In [Chapter 9](ch09.html#closures_and_decorators), we saw that Python also has generic functions ([“Single Dispatch Generic Functions”](ch09.html#generic_functions)), a limited form of the CLOS multimethods that Gamma et al. suggest as a simpler way to implement the classic Visitor pattern. Norvig, on the other hand, says that multimethods simplify the Builder pattern (slide 10). Matching design patterns to language features is not an exact science.

In classrooms around the world, design patterns are frequently taught using Java examples. I’ve heard more than one student claim that they were led to believe that the original design patterns are useful in any implementation language. It turns out that the “classic” 23 patterns from _Design Patterns_ apply to “classic” Java very well in spite of being originally presented mostly in the context of C++—a few have Smalltalk examples in the book. But that does not mean every one of those patterns applies equally well in any language. The authors are explicit right at the beginning of their book that “some of our patterns are supported directly by the less common object-oriented languages” (recall full quote on the first page of this chapter).

The Python bibliography about design patterns is very thin, compared to that of Java, C++, or Ruby. In [“Further Reading”](#dp_further) I mentioned _Learning Python Design Patterns_ by Gennadiy Zlobin, which was published as recently as November 2013. In contrast, Russ Olsen’s _Design Patterns in Ruby_ was published in 2007 and has 384 pages—284 more than Zlobin’s work.

Now that Python is becoming increasingly popular in academia, let’s hope more will be written about design patterns in the context of this language. Also, Java 8 introduced method references and anonymous functions, and those highly anticipated features are likely to prompt fresh approaches to patterns in Java—recognizing that as languages evolve, so must our understanding of how to apply the classic design patterns.

The _call_ of the Wild

As we collaborated to put the final touches to this book, tech reviewer Leonardo Rochael wondered:

If functions have a `__call__` method, and methods are also callable, do `__call__` methods also have a `__call__` method?

I don’t know if his discovery is useful, but it is a fun fact:

```
>>> 
```

[Turtles all the way down](https://fpy.li/10-8)!

[^1]:  From a slide in the talk “Root Cause Analysis of Some Faults in Design Patterns,” presented by Ralph Johnson at IME/CCSL, Universidade de São Paulo, Nov. 15, 2014.

[^2]:  Quoted from page 4 of _Design Patterns_.

[^3]:  is unresolved as of July 19, 2021. Hopefully it will be fixed by the time you read this.

[^4]:  See page 323 of _Design Patterns_.

[^5]:  Ibid., p. 196.

[^6]:  flake8 and VS Code both complain that these names are imported but not used. By definition, static analysis tools cannot understand the dynamic nature of Python. If we heed every advice from such tools, we’ll soon be writing grim and verbose Java-like code with Python syntax.

[^7]:  “Root Cause Analysis of Some Faults in Design Patterns,” presented by Johnson at IME-USP, November 15, 2014.