# Classic Named Tuples

The `collections.namedtuple` function is a factory that builds subclasses of `tuple` enhanced with field names, a class name, and an informative `__repr__`. Classes built with `namedtuple` can be used anywhere where tuples are needed, and in fact many functions of the Python standard library that are used to return tuples now return named tuples for convenience, without affecting the user’s code at all.

###### Tip

Each instance of a class built by `namedtuple` takes exactly the same amount of memory as a tuple because the field names are stored in the class.

[Example 5-4](#ex_named_tuple_1) shows how we could define a named tuple to hold information about a city.

##### Example 5-4. Defining and using a named tuple type

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Two parameters are required to create a named tuple: a class name and a list of field names, which can be given as an iterable of strings or as a single space-delimited string.

[![^2]

Field values must be passed as separate positional arguments to the constructor (in contrast, the `tuple` constructor takes a single iterable).

[![^3]

You can access the fields by name or position.

As a `tuple` subclass, `City` inherits useful methods such as `__eq__` and the special methods for comparison operators—including `__lt__`, which allows sorting lists of `City` instances.

A named tuple offers a few attributes and methods in addition to those inherited from the tuple. [Example 5-5](#ex_named_tuple_2) shows the most useful: the `_fields` class attribute, the class method `_make(iterable)`, and the `_asdict()` instance method.

##### Example 5-5. Named tuple attributes and methods (continued from the previous example)

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`._fields` is a tuple with the field names of the class.

[![^2]

`._make()` builds `City` from an iterable; `City(*delhi_data)` would do the same.

[![^3]

`._asdict()` returns a `dict` built from the named tuple instance.

[![^4]

`._asdict()` is useful to serialize the data in JSON format, for example.

###### Warning

The `_asdict` method returned an `OrderedDict` until Python 3.7. Since Python 3.8, it returns a simple `dict`—which is OK now that we can rely on key insertion order. If you must have an `OrderedDict`, the [`_asdict` documentation](https://fpy.li/5-4) recommends building one from the result: `OrderedDict(x._asdict())`.

Since Python 3.7, `namedtuple` accepts the `defaults` keyword-only argument providing an iterable of N default values for each of the N rightmost fields of the class. [Example 5-6](#ex_coord_tuple_default) shows how to define a `Coordinate` named tuple with a default value for a `reference` field.

##### Example 5-6. Named tuple attributes and methods, continued from [Example 5-5](#ex_named_tuple_2)

```
>>> 
```

In [“Class statement syntax”](#class_syntax_feature), I mentioned it’s easier to code methods with the class syntax supported by `typing.NamedTuple` and `@dataclass`. You can also add methods to a `namedtuple`, but it’s a hack. Skip the following box if you’re not interested in hacks.

##### Hacking a namedtuple to Inject a Method

Recall how we built the `Card` class in [Example 1-1](ch01.html#ex_pythonic_deck) in [Chapter 1](ch01.html#data_model):

```
Card
```

Later in [Chapter 1](ch01.html#data_model), I wrote a `spades_high` function for sorting. It would be nice if that logic was encapsulated in a method of `Card`, but adding `spades_high` to `Card` without the benefit of a `class` statement requires a quick hack: define the function and then assign it to a class attribute. [Example 5-7](#ranked_card_ex) shows how.

##### Example 5-7. frenchdeck.doctest: Adding a class attribute and a method to `Card`, the `namedtuple` from [“A Pythonic Card Deck”](ch01.html#pythonic_card_deck)

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Attach a class attribute with values for each suit.

[![^2]

`spades_high` will become a method; the first argument doesn’t need to be named `self`. Anyway, it will get the receiver when called as a method.

[![^3]

Attach the function to the `Card` class as a method named `overall_rank`.

[![^4]

It works!

For readability and future maintenance, it’s much better to code methods inside a `class` statement. But it’s good to know this hack is possible, because it may come in handy.[^4]

This was a small detour to showcase the power of a dynamic language.

Now let’s check out the `typing.NamedTuple` variation.