## Function-Oriented Strategy

Each concrete strategy in [Example 10-1](#ex_classic_strategy) is a class with a single method, `discount`. Furthermore, the strategy instances have no state (no instance attributes). You could say they look a lot like plain functions, and you would be right. [Example 10-3](#ex_strategy) is a refactoring of [Example 10-1](#ex_classic_strategy), replacing the concrete strategies with simple functions and removing the `Promo` abstract class. Only small adjustments are needed in the `Order` class.[^3]

##### Example 10-3. `Order` class with discount strategies implemented as functions

```
from
```

[![^1]

This type hint says: `promotion` may be `None`, or it may be a callable that takes an `Order` argument and returns a `Decimal`.

[![^2]

To compute a discount, call the `self.promotion` callable, passing `self` as an argument. See the following tip for the reason.

[![^3]

No abstract class.

[![^4]

Each strategy is a function.

# Why self.promotion(self)?

In the `Order` class, `promotion` is not a method. It’s an instance attribute that happens to be callable. So the first part of the expression, `self.promotion`, retrieves that callable. To invoke it, we must provide an instance of `Order`, which in this case is `self`. That’s why `self` appears twice in that expression.

[“Methods Are Descriptors”](ch23.html#methods_are_descriptors_sec) will explain the mechanism that binds methods to instances automatically. It does not apply to `promotion` because it is not a method.

The code in [Example 10-3](#ex_strategy) is shorter than [Example 10-1](#ex_classic_strategy). Using the new `Order` is also a bit simpler, as shown in the [Example 10-4](#ex_strategy_tests) doctests.

##### Example 10-4. Sample usage of `Order` class with promotions as functions

```
    >>> joe = Customer('John Doe', 0)  
```

[![^1]

Same test fixtures as [Example 10-1](#ex_classic_strategy).

[![^2]

To apply a discount strategy to an `Order`, just pass the promotion function as an argument.

[![^3]

A different promotion function is used here and in the next test.

Note the callouts in [Example 10-4](#ex_strategy_tests)—there is no need to instantiate a new promotion object with each new order: the functions are ready to use.

It is interesting to note that in _Design Patterns_, the authors suggest: “Strategy objects often make good flyweights.”[^4] The sharing is recommended to reduce the cost of creating a new concrete strategy object when the same strategy is applied over and over again with every new context—with every new `Order` instance, in our example. So, to overcome a drawback of the Strategy pattern—its runtime cost—the authors recommend applying yet another pattern. Meanwhile, the line count and maintenance cost of your code are piling up.

A thornier use case, with complex concrete strategies holding internal state, may require all the pieces of the Strategy and Flyweight design patterns combined. But often concrete strategies have no internal state; they only deal with data from the context. If that is the case, then by all means use plain old functions instead of coding single-method classes implementing a single-method interface declared in yet another class. A function is more lightweight than an instance of a user-defined class, and there is no need for Flyweight because each strategy function is created just once per Python process when it loads the module. A plain function is also “a shared object that can be used in multiple contexts simultaneously.”

Now that we have implemented the Strategy pattern with functions, other possibilities emerge. Suppose you want to create a “metastrategy” that selects the best available discount for a given `Order`. In the following sections we study additional refactorings that implement this requirement using a variety of approaches that leverage functions and modules as objects.