## Choosing the Best Strategy: Simple Approach

Given the same customers and shopping carts from the tests in [Example 10-4](#ex_strategy_tests), we now add three additional tests in [Example 10-5](#ex_strategy_best_tests).

##### Example 10-5. The `best_promo` function applies all discounts and returns the largest

```
    
```

[![^1]

`best_promo` selected the `larger_order_promo` for customer `joe`.

[![^2]

Here `joe` got the discount from `bulk_item_promo` for ordering lots of bananas.

[![^3]

Checking out with a simple cart, `best_promo` gave loyal customer `ann` the discount for the `fidelity_promo`.

The implementation of `best_promo` is very simple. See [Example 10-6](#ex_strategy_best).

##### Example 10-6. `best_promo` finds the maximum discount iterating over a list of functions

```
promos
```

[![^1]

`promos`: list of the strategies implemented as functions.

[![^2]

`best_promo` takes an instance of `Order` as argument, as do the other `*_promo` functions.

[![^3]

Using a generator expression, we apply each of the functions from `promos` to the `order`, and return the maximum discount computed.

[Example 10-6](#ex_strategy_best) is straightforward: `promos` is a `list` of functions. Once you get used to the idea that functions are first-class objects, it naturally follows that building data structures holding functions often makes sense.

Although [Example 10-6](#ex_strategy_best) works and is easy to read, there is some duplication that could lead to a subtle bug: to add a new promotion strategy, we need to code the function and remember to add it to the `promos` list, or else the new promotion will work when explicitly passed as an argument to `Order`, but will not be considered by `best_promotion`.

Read on for a couple of solutions to this issue.