# Further Reading

Most special methods covered in the `Vector` example also appear in the `Vector2d` example from [Chapter 11](ch11.html#pythonic_objects), so the references in [“Further Reading”](ch11.html#pythonic_further_reading) are all relevant here.

The powerful `reduce` higher-order function is also known as fold, accumulate, aggregate, compress, and inject. For more information, see Wikipedia’s [“Fold (higher-order function)” article](https://fpy.li/12-5), which presents applications of that higher-order function with emphasis on functional programming with recursive data structures. The article also includes a table listing fold-like functions in dozens of programming languages.

[“What’s New in Python 2.5”](https://fpy.li/12-6) has a short explanation of `__index__`, designed to support `__getitem__` methods, as we saw in [“A Slice-Aware __getitem__”](#slice_aware_sec). [PEP 357—Allowing Any Object to be Used for Slicing](https://fpy.li/pep357) details the need for it from the perspective of an implementor of a C-extension—Travis Oliphant, the primary creator of NumPy. Oliphant’s many contributions to Python made it a leading scientific computing language, which then positioned it to lead the way in machine learning applications.

##### Soapbox

Protocols as Informal Interfaces

Protocols are not an invention of Python. The Smalltalk team, which also coined the expression “object-oriented,” used “protocol” as a synonym for what we now call interfaces. Some Smalltalk programming environments allowed programmers to tag a group of methods as a protocol, but that was merely a documentation and navigation aid, and not enforced by the language. That’s why I believe “informal interface” is a reasonable short explanation for “protocol” when I speak to an audience that is more familiar with formal (and compiler enforced) interfaces.

Established protocols naturally evolve in any language that uses dynamic typing, that is, when type checking is done at runtime because there is no static type information in method signatures and variables. Ruby is another important object-oriented language that has dynamic typing and uses protocols.

In the Python documentation, you can often tell when a protocol is being discussed when you see language like “a file-like object.” This is a quick way of saying “something that behaves sufficiently like a file, by implementing the parts of the file interface that are relevant in the context.”

You may think that implementing only part of a protocol is sloppy, but it has the advantage of keeping things simple. [Section 3.3](https://fpy.li/12-7) of the “Data Model” chapter suggests:

> When implementing a class that emulates any built-in type, it is important that the emulation only be implemented to the degree that it makes sense for the object being modeled. For example, some sequences may work well with retrieval of individual elements, but extracting a slice may not make sense.

When we don’t need to code nonsense methods just to fulfill some overdesigned interface contract and keep the compiler happy, it becomes easier to follow the [KISS principle](https://fpy.li/12-8).

On the other hand, if you want to use a type checker to verify your protocol implementations, then a stricter definition of protocol is required. That’s what `typing.Protocol` provides.

I’ll have more to say about protocols and interfaces in [Chapter 13](ch13.html#ifaces_prot_abc), where they are the main focus.

Origins of Duck Typing

I believe the Ruby community, more than any other, helped popularize the term “duck typing,” as they preached to the Java masses. But the expression has been used in Python discussions before either Ruby or Python were “popular.” According to Wikipedia, an early example of the duck analogy in object-oriented programming is a message to the Python-list by Alex Martelli from July 26, 2000: [“polymorphism (was Re: Type checking in python?)”](https://fpy.li/12-9). That’s where the quote at the beginning of this chapter comes from. If you are curious about the literary origins of the “duck typing” term, and the applications of this OO concept in many languages, check out Wikipedia’s [“Duck typing” entry](https://fpy.li/12-10).

A Safe__format__, with Enhanced Usability

While implementing `__format__`, I did not take any precautions regarding `Vector` instances with a very large number of components, as we did in `__repr__` using `reprlib`. The reasoning is that `repr()` is for debugging and logging, so it must always generate some serviceable output, while `__format__` is used to display output to end users who presumably want to see the entire `Vector`. If you think this is dangerous, then it would be cool to implement a further extension to the Format Specifier Mini-Language.

Here is how I’d do it: by default, any formatted `Vector` would display a reasonable but limited number of components, say 30. If there are more elements than that, the default behavior would be similar to what the `reprlib` does: chop the excess and put `...` in its place. However, if the format specifier ended with the special `*` code, meaning “all,” then the size limitation would be disabled. So a user who’s unaware of the problem of very long displays will not be bitten by it by accident. But if the default limitation becomes a nuisance, then the presence of the `...` could lead the user to search the documentation and discover the `*` formatting code.

The Search for a Pythonic Sum

There’s no single answer to “What is Pythonic?” just as there’s no single answer to “What is beautiful?” Saying, as I often do, that it means using “idiomatic Python” is not 100% satisfactory, because what may be “idiomatic” for you may not be for me. One thing I know: “idiomatic” does not mean using the most obscure language features.

In the [Python-list](https://fpy.li/12-11), there’s a thread titled [“Pythonic Way to Sum n-th List Element?” from April 2003](https://fpy.li/12-12). It’s relevant to our discussion of `reduce` in this chapter.

The original poster, Guy Middleton, asked for an improvement on this solution, stating he did not like to use `lambda`:[^7]

```
>>> 
```

That code uses lots of idioms: `lambda`, `reduce`, and a list comprehension. It would probably come last in a popularity contest, because it offends people who hate `lambda` and those who despise list comprehensions—pretty much both sides of a divide.

If you’re going to use `lambda`, there’s probably no reason to use a list comprehension—except for filtering, which is not the case here.

Here is a solution of my own that will please the `lambda` lovers:

```
>>> 
```

I did not take part in the original thread, and I wouldn’t use that in real code, because I don’t like `lambda` too much myself, but I wanted to show an example without a list comprehension.

The first answer came from Fernando Perez, creator of IPython, highlighting that NumPy supports _n_-dimensional arrays and _n_-dimensional slicing:

```
>>> 
```

I think Perez’s solution is cool, but Guy Middleton praised this next solution, by Paul Rubin and Skip Montanaro:

```
>>> 
```

Then Evan Simpson asked, “What’s wrong with this?”:

```
>>> 
```

Lots of people agreed that was quite Pythonic. Alex Martelli went as far as saying that’s probably how Guido would code it.

I like Evan Simpson’s code, but I also like David Eppstein’s comment on it:

> If you want the sum of a list of items, you should write it in a way that looks like “the sum of a list of items,” not in a way that looks like “loop over these items, maintain another variable t, perform a sequence of additions.” Why do we have high-level languages if not to express our intentions at a higher level and let the language worry about what low-level operations are needed to implement it?

Then Alex Martelli comes back to suggest:

> “The sum” is so frequently needed that I wouldn’t mind at all if Python singled it out as a built-in. But “reduce(operator.add, …” just isn’t a great way to express it, in my opinion (and yet as an old APL’er, and FP-liker, I _should_ like it—but I don’t).

Alex goes on to suggest a `sum()` function, which he contributed. It became a built-in in Python 2.3, released only three months after that conversation took place. So Alex’s preferred syntax became the norm:

```
>>> 
```

By the end of the next year (November 2004), Python 2.4 was launched with generator expressions, providing what is now in my opinion the most Pythonic answer to Guy Middleton’s original question:

```
>>> 
```

This is not only more readable than `reduce` but also avoids the trap of the empty sequence: `sum([])` is `0`, simple as that.

In the same conversation, Alex Martelli suggests the `reduce` built-in in Python 2 was more trouble than it was worth, because it encouraged coding idioms that were hard to explain. He was most convincing: the function was demoted to the `functools` module in Python 3.

Still, `functools.reduce` has its place. It solved the problem of our `Vector.__hash__` in a way that I would call Pythonic.

[^1]: , along with the `__iter__` method.

[^2]: . For now, this simplified explanation will do.

[^3]:  Although `__match_args__` exists to support pattern matching in Python 3.10, setting this attribute is harmless in previous versions of Python. In the first edition of this book, I named it `shortcut_names`. With the new name it does double duty: it supports positional patterns in `case` clauses, and it holds the names of the dynamic attributes supported by special logic in `__getattr__` and `__setattr__`.

[^4]: .

[^5]: .

[^6]: .

[^7]:  I adapted the code for this presentation: in 2003, `reduce` was a built-in, but in Python 3 we need to import it; also, I replaced the names `x` and `y` with `my_list` and `sub`, for sub-list.