# Vector Take #1: Vector2d Compatible

The first version of `Vector` should be as compatible as possible with our earlier `Vector2d` class.

However, by design, the `Vector` constructor is not compatible with the `Vector2d` constructor. We could make `Vector(3, 4)` and `Vector(3, 4, 5)` work, by taking arbitrary arguments with `*args` in `__init__`, but the best practice for a sequence constructor is to take the data as an iterable argument in the constructor, like all built-in sequence types do. [Example 12-1](#ex_vector_demo) shows some ways of instantiating our new `Vector` objects.

##### Example 12-1. Tests of `Vector.__init__` and `Vector.__repr__`

```
>>> 
```

Apart from a new constructor signature, I made sure every test I did with `Vector2d` (e.g., `Vector2d(3, 4)`) passed and produced the same result with a two-component `Vector([3, 4])`.

###### Warning

When a `Vector` has more than six components, the string produced by `repr()` is abbreviated with `...` as seen in the last line of [Example 12-1](#ex_vector_demo). This is crucial in any collection type that may contain a large number of items, because `repr` is used for debugging—and you don’t want a single large object to span thousands of lines in your console or log. Use the `reprlib` module to produce limited-length representations, as in [Example 12-2](#ex_vector_v1). The `reprlib` module was named `repr` in Python 2.7.

[Example 12-2](#ex_vector_v1) lists the implementation of our first version of `Vector` (this example builds on the code shown in Examples [11-2](ch11.html#ex_vector2d_v0) and [11-3](ch11.html#ex_vector2d_v1)).

##### Example 12-2. vector_v1.py: derived from vector2d_v1.py

```
from
```

[![^1]

The `self._components` instance “protected” attribute will hold an `array` with the `Vector` components.

[![^2]

To allow iteration, we return an iterator over `self._components`.[^1]

[![^3]

Use `reprlib.repr()` to get a limited-length representation of `self._components` (e.g., `array('d', [0.0, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, ...])`).

[![^4]

Remove the `array('d',` prefix, and the trailing `)` before plugging the string into a `Vector` constructor call.

[![^5]

Build a `bytes` object directly from `self._components`.

[![^6]

Since Python 3.8, `math.hypot` accepts N-dimensional points. I used this expression before: `math.sqrt(sum(x * x for x in self))`.

[![^7]

The only change needed from the earlier `frombytes` is in the last line: we pass the `memoryview` directly to the constructor, without unpacking with `*` as we did before.

The way I used `reprlib.repr` deserves some elaboration. That function produces safe representations of large or recursive structures by limiting the length of the output string and marking the cut with `'...'`. I wanted the `repr` of a `Vector` to look like `Vector([3.0, 4.0, 5.0])` and not `Vector(array('d', [3.0, 4.0, 5.0]))`, because the fact that there is an `array` inside a `Vector` is an implementation detail. Because these constructor calls build identical `Vector` objects, I prefer the simpler syntax using a `list` argument.

When coding `__repr__`, I could have produced the simplified `components` display with this expression: `reprlib.repr(list(self._components))`. However, this would be wasteful, as I’d be copying every item from `self._components` to a `list` just to use the `list` `repr`. Instead, I decided to apply `reprlib.repr` to the `self._components` array directly, and then chop off the characters outside of the `[]`. That’s what the second line of `__repr__` does in [Example 12-2](#ex_vector_v1).

###### Tip

Because of its role in debugging, calling `repr()` on an object should never raise an exception. If something goes wrong inside your implementation of `__repr__`, you must deal with the issue and do your best to produce some serviceable output that gives the user a chance of identifying the receiver (`self`).

Note that the `__str__`, `__eq__`, and `__bool__` methods are unchanged from `Vector2d`, and only one character was changed in `frombytes` (a `*` was removed in the last line). This is one of the benefits of making the original `Vector2d` iterable.

By the way, we could have subclassed `Vector` from `Vector2d`, but I chose not to do it for two reasons. First, the incompatible constructors really make subclassing not advisable. I could work around that with some clever parameter handling in `__init__`, but the second reason is more important: I want `Vector` to be a standalone example of a class implementing the sequence protocol. That’s what we’ll do next, after a discussion of the term _protocol_.