# Chapter Summary

We covered some difficult terrain in this chapter. I tried to make the journey as smooth as possible, but we definitely entered the realm of metaprogramming.

We started with a simple `@register` decorator without an inner function, and finished with a parameterized `@clock()` involving two levels of nested functions.

Registration decorators, though simple in essence, have real applications in Python frameworks. We will apply the registration idea in one implementation of the Strategy design pattern in [Chapter 10](ch10.html#rethinking_design_patterns).

Understanding how decorators actually work required covering the difference between _import time_ and _runtime_, then diving into variable scoping, closures, and the new `nonlocal` declaration. Mastering closures and `nonlocal` is valuable not only to build decorators, but also to code event-oriented programs for GUIs or asynchronous I/O with callbacks, and to adopt a functional style when it makes sense.

Parameterized decorators almost always involve at least two nested functions, maybe more if you want to use `@functools.wraps` to produce a decorator that provides better support for more advanced techniques. One such technique is stacked decorators, which we saw in [Example 9-18](#fibo_demo_cache_ex). For more sophisticated decorators, a class-based implementation may be easier to read and maintain.

As examples of parameterized decorators in the standard library, we visited the powerful `@cache` and `@singledispatch` from the `functools` module.