# Further Reading

Item #26 of Brett Slatkin’s [_Effective Python_, 2nd ed.](https://fpy.li/effectpy) (Addison-Wesley), covers best practices for function decorators and recommends always using `functools.wraps`—which we saw in [Example 9-16](#ex_clockdeco2).[^11]

Graham Dumpleton has a [series of in-depth blog posts](https://fpy.li/9-5) about techniques for implementing well-behaved decorators, starting with [“How you implemented your Python decorator is wrong”](https://fpy.li/9-6). His deep expertise in this matter is also nicely packaged in the [`wrapt`](https://fpy.li/9-7) module he wrote to simplify the implementation of decorators and dynamic function wrappers, which support introspection and behave correctly when further decorated, when applied to methods, and when used as attribute descriptors. [Chapter 23](ch23.html#attribute_descriptors) in [Part III](part03.html#classes_protocols_part) is about descriptors.

Chapter 9, [“Metaprogramming”](https://fpy.li/9-8), of the _Python Cookbook_, 3rd ed. by David Beazley and Brian K. Jones (O’Reilly), has several recipes, from elementary decorators to very sophisticated ones, including one that can be called as a regular decorator or as a decorator factory, e.g., `@clock` or `@clock()`. That’s “Recipe 9.6. Defining a Decorator That Takes an Optional Argument” in that cookbook.

Michele Simionato authored a package aiming to “simplify the usage of decorators for the average programmer, and to popularize decorators by showing various nontrivial examples,” according to the docs. It’s available on PyPI as the [decorator package](https://fpy.li/9-9).

Created when decorators were still a new feature in Python, the [Python Decorator Library wiki page](https://fpy.li/9-10) has dozens of examples. Because that page started years ago, some of the techniques shown have been superseded, but the page is still an excellent source of inspiration.

[“Closures in Python”](https://fpy.li/9-11) is a short blog post by Fredrik Lundh that explains the terminology of closures.

[PEP 3104—Access to Names in Outer Scopes](https://fpy.li/9-12) describes the introduction of the `nonlocal` declaration to allow rebinding of names that are neither local nor global. It also includes an excellent overview of how this issue is resolved in other dynamic languages (Perl, Ruby, JavaScript, etc.) and the pros and cons of the design options available to Python.

On a more theoretical level, [PEP 227—Statically Nested Scopes](https://fpy.li/9-13) documents the introduction of lexical scoping as an option in Python 2.1 and as a standard in Python 2.2, explaining the rationale and design choices for the implementation of closures in Python.

[PEP 443](https://fpy.li/9-14) provides the rationale and a detailed description of the single-dispatch generic functions’ facility. An old (March 2005) blog post by Guido van Rossum, [“Five-Minute Multimethods in Python”](https://fpy.li/9-15), walks through an implementation of generic functions (a.k.a. multimethods) using decorators. His code supports multiple-dispatch (i.e., dispatch based on more than one positional argument). Guido’s multimethods code is interesting, but it’s a didactic example. For a modern, production-ready implementation of multiple dispatch generic functions, check out [Reg](https://fpy.li/9-16) by Martijn Faassen—author of the model-driven and REST-savvy [Morepath](https://fpy.li/9-17) web framework.

##### Soapbox

Dynamic Scope Versus Lexical Scope

The designer of any language with first-class functions faces this issue: being a first-class object, a function is defined in a certain scope but may be invoked in other scopes. The question is: how to evaluate the free variables? The first and simplest answer is “dynamic scope.” This means that free variables are evaluated by looking into the environment where the function is invoked.

If Python had dynamic scope and no closures, we could improvise `avg`—similar to [Example 9-8](#ex_average_fn)—like this:

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Before using `avg`, we have to define `series = []` ourselves, so we must know that `averager` (inside `make_averager`) refers to a list named `series`.

[![^2]

Behind the scenes, `series` accumulates the values to be averaged.

[![^3]

When `series = [1]` is executed, the previous list is lost. This could happen by accident, when handling two independent running averages at the same time.

Functions should be opaque, with their implementation hidden from users. But with dynamic scope, if a function uses free variables, the programmer has to know its internals to set up an environment where it works correctly. After years of struggling with the LaTeX document preparation language, the excellent _Practical LaTeX_ book by George Grätzer (Springer) taught me that LaTeX variables use dynamic scope. That’s why they were so confusing to me!

Emacs Lisp also uses dynamic scope, at least by default. See [“Dynamic Binding”](https://fpy.li/9-18) in the Emacs Lisp manual for a short explanation.

Dynamic scope is easier to implement, which is probably why it was the path taken by John McCarthy when he created Lisp, the first language to have first-class functions. Paul Graham’s article [“The Roots of Lisp”](https://fpy.li/9-19) is an accessible explanation of John McCarthy’s original paper about the Lisp language, ["Recursive Functions of Symbolic Expressions and Their Computation by Machine, Part I”](https://fpy.li/9-20). McCarthy’s paper is a masterpiece as great as Beethoven’s 9th Symphony. Paul Graham translated it for the rest of us, from mathematics to English and running code.

Paul Graham’s commentary explains how tricky dynamic scoping is. Quoting from “The Roots of Lisp”:

> It’s an eloquent testimony to the dangers of dynamic scope that even the very first example of higher-order Lisp functions was broken because of it. It may be that McCarthy was not fully aware of the implications of dynamic scope in 1960. Dynamic scope remained in Lisp implementations for a surprisingly long time—until Sussman and Steele developed Scheme in 1975. Lexical scope does not complicate the definition of `eval` very much, but it may make compilers harder to write.

Today, lexical scope is the norm: free variables are evaluated considering the environment where the function is defined. Lexical scope complicates the implementation of languages with first-class functions, because it requires the support of closures. On the other hand, lexical scope makes source code easier to read. Most languages invented since Algol have lexical scope. One notable exception is JavaScript, where the special variable `this` is confusing because it can be lexically or dynamically scoped, [depending on how the code is written](https://fpy.li/9-21).

For many years, Python `lambda`s did not provide closures, contributing to the bad name of this feature among functional-programming geeks in the blogosphere. This was fixed in Python 2.2 (December 2001), but the blogosphere has a long memory. Since then, `lambda` is embarrassing only because of its limited syntax.

Python Decorators and the Decorator Design Pattern

Python function decorators fit the general description of decorator given by Gamma et al. in _Design Patterns_: “Attach additional responsibilities to an object dynamically. Decorators provide a flexible alternative to subclassing for extending functionality.”

At the implementation level, Python decorators do not resemble the classic decorator design pattern, but an analogy can be made.

In the design pattern, `Decorator` and `Component` are abstract classes. An instance of a concrete decorator wraps an instance of a concrete component in order to add behaviors to it. Quoting from _Design Patterns_:

> The decorator conforms to the interface of the component it decorates so that its presence is transparent to the component’s clients. The decorator forwards requests to the component and may perform additional actions (such as drawing a border) before or after forwarding. Transparency lets you nest decorators recursively, thereby allowing an unlimited number of added responsibilities.” (p. 175)

In Python, the decorator function plays the role of a concrete `Decorator` subclass, and the inner function it returns is a decorator instance. The returned function wraps the function to be decorated, which is analogous to the component in the design pattern. The returned function is transparent because it conforms to the interface of the component by accepting the same arguments. It forwards calls to the component and may perform additional actions either before or after it. Borrowing from the previous citation, we can adapt the last sentence to say that “Transparency lets you stack decorators, thereby allowing an unlimited number of added behaviors.”

Note that I am not suggesting that function decorators should be used to implement the decorator pattern in Python programs. Although this can be done in specific situations, in general the decorator pattern is best implemented with classes to represent the decorator and the components it will wrap.

[^1]: .

[^2]: .

[^3]:  Thanks to tech reviewer Leonardo Rochael for suggesting this summary.

[^4]:  Python does not have a program global scope, only module global scopes.

[^5]:  is a computer science term vaguely related to “memorization,” but not the same.

[^6]:  Unfortunately, Mypy 0.770 complains when it sees multiple functions with the same name.

[^7]: , the `number` ABCs are not deprecated and you find them in Python 3 code.

[^8]:  Maybe one day you’ll also be able to express this with single unparameterized `@htmlize.register` and type hint using `Union`, but when I tried, Python raised a `TypeError` with a message saying that `Union` is not a class. So, although PEP 484 _syntax_ is supported by `@singledispatch`, the _semantics_ are not there yet.

[^9]:  types.

[^10]: `. I’d rather not. If you use static checking tools, it’s very important to know when to ignore them.

[^11]:  I wanted to make the code as simple as possible, so I did not follow Slatkin’s excellent advice in all examples.