# Decorators 101

A decorator is a callable that takes another function as an argument (the decorated function).

A decorator may perform some processing with the decorated function, and returns it or replaces it with another function or callable object.[^2]

In other words, assuming an existing decorator named `decorate`, this code:

```
@decorate
```

has the same effect as writing this:

```
def
```

The end result is the same: at the end of either of these snippets, the `target` name is bound to whatever function is returned by `decorate(target)`—which may be the function initially named `target`, or may be a different function.

To confirm that the decorated function is replaced, see the console session in [Example 9-1](#decorator_replaces).

##### Example 9-1. A decorator usually replaces a function with a different one

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`deco` returns its `inner` function object.

[![^2]

`target` is decorated by `deco`.

[![^3]

Invoking the decorated `target` actually runs `inner`.

[![^4]

Inspection reveals that `target` is a now a reference to `inner`.

Strictly speaking, decorators are just syntactic sugar. As we just saw, you can always simply call a decorator like any regular callable, passing another function. Sometimes that is actually convenient, especially when doing _metaprogramming_—changing program behavior at runtime.

Three essential facts make a good summary of decorators:

- A decorator is a function or another callable.
    
- A decorator may replace the decorated function with a different one.
    
- Decorators are executed immediately when a module is loaded.
    

Now let’s focus on the third point.