# When Python Executes Decorators

A key feature of decorators is that they run right after the decorated function is defined. That is usually at _import time_ (i.e., when a module is loaded by Python). Consider _registration.py_ in [Example 9-2](#registration_ex).

##### Example 9-2. The registration.py module

```
registry
```

[![^1]

`registry` will hold references to functions decorated by `@register`.

[![^2]

`register` takes a function as an argument.

[![^3]

Display what function is being decorated, for demonstration.

[![^4]

Include `func` in `registry`.

[![^5]

Return `func`: we must return a function; here we return the same received as argument.

[![^6]

`f1` and `f2` are decorated by `@register`.

[![^7]

`f3` is not decorated.

[![^8]

`main` displays the `registry`, then calls `f1()`, `f2()`, and `f3()`.

[![^9]

`main()` is only invoked if _registration.py_ runs as a script.

The output of running _registration.py_ as a script looks like this:

$ python3 registration.py
running register`(`<`function` f1 at 0x100631bf8>`)`
running register`(`<`function` f2 at 0x100631c80>`)`
running main`()`
registry -> `[`<`function` f1 at 0x100631bf8>, <`function` f2 at 0x100631c80>`]`
running f1`()`
running f2`()`
running f3`()`

Note that `register` runs (twice) before any other function in the module. When `register` is called, it receives the decorated function object as an argument—for example, `<function f1 at 0x100631bf8>`.

After the module is loaded, the `registry` list holds references to the two decorated functions: `f1` and `f2`. These functions, as well as `f3`, are only executed when explicitly called by `main`.

If _registration.py_ is imported (and not run as a script), the output is this:

```
>>> 
```

At this time, if you inspect `registry`, this is what you see:

```
>>> 
```

The main point of [Example 9-2](#registration_ex) is to emphasize that function decorators are executed as soon as the module is imported, but the decorated functions only run when they are explicitly invoked. This highlights the difference between what Pythonistas call _import time_ and _runtime_.