# Do This, Then That: else Blocks Beyond if

This is no secret, but it is an underappreciated language feature: the `else` clause can be used not only in `if` statements but also in `for`, `while`, and `try` statements.

The semantics of `for/else`, `while/else`, and `try/else` are closely related, but very different from `if/else`. Initially, the word `else` actually hindered my understanding of these features, but eventually I got used to it.

Here are the rules:

`for`

The `else` block will run only if and when the `for` loop runs to completion (i.e., not if the `for` is aborted with a `break`).

`while`

The `else` block will run only if and when the `while` loop exits because the condition became _falsy_ (i.e., not if the `while` is aborted with a `break`).

`try`

The `else` block will run only if no exception is raised in the `try` block. The [official docs](https://fpy.li/18-27) also state: “Exceptions in the `else` clause are not handled by the preceding `except` clauses.”

In all cases, the `else` clause is also skipped if an exception or a `return`, `break`, or `continue` statement causes control to jump out of the main block of the compound statement.

###### Note

I think `else` is a very poor choice for the keyword in all cases except `if`. It implies an excluding alternative, like, “Run this loop, otherwise do that,” but the semantics for `else` in loops is the opposite: “Run this loop, then do that.” This suggests `then` as a better keyword—which would also make sense in the `try` context: “Try this, then do that.” However, adding a new keyword is a breaking change to the language—not an easy decision to make.

Using `else` with these statements often makes the code easier to read and saves the trouble of setting up control flags or coding extra `if` statements.

The use of `else` in loops generally follows the pattern of this snippet:

```
for
```

In the case of `try/except` blocks, `else` may seem redundant at first. After all, the `after_call()` in the following snippet will run only if the `dangerous_call()` does not raise an exception, correct?

```
try
```

However, doing so puts the `after_call()` inside the `try` block for no good reason. For clarity and correctness, the body of a `try` block should only have the statements that may generate the expected exceptions. This is better:

```
try
```

Now it’s clear that the `try` block is guarding against possible errors in `dangerous_call()` and not in `after_call()`. It’s also explicit that `after_call()` will only execute if no exceptions are raised in the `try` block.

In Python, `try/except` is commonly used for control flow, and not just for error handling. There’s even an acronym/slogan for that documented in the [official Python glossary](https://fpy.li/18-28):

> EAFP
> 
> Easier to ask for forgiveness than permission. This common Python coding style assumes the existence of valid keys or attributes and catches exceptions if the assumption proves false. This clean and fast style is characterized by the presence of many try and except statements. The technique contrasts with the _LBYL_ style common to many other languages such as C.

The glossary then defines LBYL:

> LBYL
> 
> Look before you leap. This coding style explicitly tests for pre-conditions before making calls or lookups. This style contrasts with the _EAFP_ approach and is characterized by the presence of many if statements. In a multi-threaded environment, the LBYL approach can risk introducing a race condition between “the looking” and “the leaping.” For example, the code, if key in mapping: return mapping[key] can fail if another thread removes key from mapping after the test, but before the lookup. This issue can be solved with locks or by using the EAFP approach.

Given the EAFP style, it makes even more sense to know and use `else` blocks well in `try/except` statements.

###### Note

When the `match` statement was discussed, some people (including me) thought it should also have an `else` clause. In the end it was decided that it wasn’t needed because `case _:` does the same job.[^13]

Now let’s summarize the chapter.