# An asyncio Example: Probing Domains

Imagine you are about to start a new blog on Python, and you plan to register a domain using a Python keyword and the _.DEV_ suffix—for example: _AWAIT.DEV._ [Example 21-1](#blogdom_ex) is a script using _asyncio_ to check several domains concurrently. This is the output it produces:

$ python3 blogdom.py
  with.dev
+ elif.dev
+ def.dev
  from.dev
  else.dev
  or.dev
  if.dev
  del.dev
+ as.dev
  none.dev
  pass.dev
  true.dev
+ in.dev
+ for.dev
+ is.dev
+ and.dev
+ try.dev
+ not.dev

Note that the domains appear unordered. If you run the script, you’ll see them displayed one after the other, with varying delays. The `+` sign indicates your machine was able to resolve the domain via DNS. Otherwise, the domain did not resolve and may be available.[^5]

In _blogdom.py_, the DNS probing is done via native coroutine objects. Because the asynchronous operations are interleaved, the time needed to check the 18 domains is much less than checking them sequentially. In fact, the total time is practically the same as the time for the single slowest DNS response, instead of the sum of the times of all responses.

[Example 21-1](#blogdom_ex) shows the code for _blogdom.py_.

##### Example 21-1. blogdom.py: search for domains for a Python blog

```
#!/usr/bin/env python3
```

[![^1]

Set maximum length of keyword for domains, because shorter is better.

[![^2]

`probe` returns a tuple with the domain name and a boolean; `True` means the domain resolved. Returning the domain name will make it easier to display the results.

[![^3]

Get a reference to the `asyncio` event loop, so we can use it next.

[![^4]

The [`loop.getaddrinfo(…)`](https://fpy.li/21-4) coroutine-method returns a [five-part tuple of parameters](https://fpy.li/21-5) to connect to the given address using a socket. In this example, we don’t need the result. If we got it, the domain resolves; otherwise, it doesn’t.

[![^5]

`main` must be a coroutine, so that we can use `await` in it.

[![^6]

Generator to yield Python keywords with length up to `MAX_KEYWORD_LEN`.

[![^7]

Generator to yield domain names with the `.dev` suffix.

[![^8]

Build a list of coroutine objects by invoking the `probe` coroutine with each `domain` argument.

[![^9]

`asyncio.as_completed` is a generator that yields coroutines that return the results of the coroutines passed to it in the order they are completed—not the order they were submitted. It’s similar to `futures.as_completed`, which we saw in [Chapter 20](ch20.html#futures_ch), [Example 20-4](ch20.html#flags_threadpool_futures_ex).

[![^10]

At this point, we know the coroutine is done because that’s how `as_completed` works. Therefore, the `await` expression will not block but we need it to get the result from `coro`. If `coro` raised an unhandled exception, it would be re-raised here.

[![^11]

`asyncio.run` starts the event loop and returns only when the event loop exits. This is a common pattern for scripts that use `asyncio`: implement `main` as a coroutine, and drive it with `asyncio.run` inside the `if __name__ == '__main__':` block.

###### Tip

The `asyncio.get_running_loop` function was added in Python 3.7 for use inside coroutines, as shown in `probe`. If there’s no running loop, `asyncio.get_running_loop` raises `RuntimeError`. Its implementation is simpler and faster than `asyncio.get_event_loop`, which may start an event loop if necessary. Since Python 3.10, `asyncio.get_event_loop` is [deprecated](https://fpy.li/21-6) and will eventually become an alias to `asyncio.get_running_loop`.