### Asynchronous comprehensions

Yury Selivanov—the author of PEP 530—justifies the need for asynchronous comprehensions with three short code snippets reproduced next.

We can all agree that we should be able to rewrite this code:

```
result
```

like this:

```
result
```

In addition, given a native coroutine `fun`, we should be able to write this:

```
result
```

###### Tip

Using `await` in a list comprehension is similar to using `asyncio.gather`. But `gather` gives you more control over exception handling, thanks to its optional `return_exceptions` argument. Caleb Hattingh recommends always setting `return_exceptions=True` (the default is `False`). Please see the [`asyncio.gather` documentation](https://fpy.li/21-48) for more.

Back to the magic asynchronous console:

```
>>> 
```

Note that I sorted the list of names to show that the results come out in the order they were submitted, in both cases.

PEP 530 allows the use of `async for` and `await` in list comprehensions as well as in `dict` and `set` comprehensions. For example, here is a `dict` comprehension to store the results of `multi_probe` in the asynchronous console:

```
>>> 
```

We can use the `await` keyword in the expression before the `for` or `async for` clause, and also in the expression after the `if` clause. Here is a set comprehension in the asynchronous console, collecting only the domains that were found:

```
>>> 
```

I had to put extra parentheses around the `await` expression due to the higher precedence of the `__getattr__` operator `.` (dot).

Again, all of these comprehensions can only appear inside an `async def` body or in the enchanted asynchronous console.

Now let’s talk about a very important feature of the `async` statements, `async` expressions, and the objects they create. Those constructs are often used with _asyncio_ but, they are actually library independent.