# Overriding Versus Nonoverriding Descriptors

Recall that there is an important asymmetry in the way Python handles attributes. Reading an attribute through an instance normally returns the attribute defined in the instance, but if there is no such attribute in the instance, a class attribute will be retrieved. On the other hand, assigning to an attribute in an instance normally creates the attribute in the instance, without affecting the class at all.

This asymmetry also affects descriptors, in effect creating two broad categories of descriptors, depending on whether the `__set__` method is implemented. If `__set__` is present, the class is an overriding descriptor; otherwise, it is a nonoverriding descriptor. These terms will make sense as we study descriptor behaviors in the next examples.

Observing the different descriptor categories requires a few classes, so we’ll use the code in [Example 23-8](#descriptorkinds_ex) as our test bed for the following sections.

###### Tip

Every `__get__` and `__set__` method in [Example 23-8](#descriptorkinds_ex) calls `print_args` so their invocations are displayed in a readable way. Understanding `print_args` and the auxiliary functions `cls_name` and `display` is not important, so don’t get distracted by them.

##### Example 23-8. descriptorkinds.py: simple classes for studying descriptor overriding behaviors

```
### auxiliary functions for display only ###
```

[![^1]

An overriding descriptor class with `__get__` and `__set__`.

[![^2]

The `print_args` function is called by every descriptor method in this example.

[![^3]

An overriding descriptor without a `__get__` method.

[![^4]

No `__set__` method here, so this is a nonoverriding descriptor.

[![^5]

The managed class, using one instance of each of the descriptor classes.

[![^6]

The `spam` method is here for comparison, because methods are also descriptors.

In the following sections, we will examine the behavior of attribute reads and writes on the `Managed` class, and one instance of it, going through each of the different descriptors defined.