# Implementing a Generic Class

In [Example 13-7](ch13.html#ex_tombola_abc) we defined the `Tombola` ABC: an interface for classes that work like a bingo cage. The `LottoBlower` class from [Example 13-10](ch13.html#ex_lotto) is a concrete implementation. Now we’ll study a generic version of `LottoBlower` used like in [Example 15-15](#ex_generic_lotto_demo).

##### Example 15-15. generic_lotto_demo.py: using a generic lottery blower class

```
from
```

[![^1]

To instantiate a generic class, we give it an actual type parameter, like `int` here.

[![^2]

Mypy will correctly infer that `first` is an `int`…

[![^3]

… and that `remain` is a `tuple` of integers.

In addition, Mypy reports violations of the parameterized type with helpful messages, such as what’s shown in [Example 15-16](#ex_generic_lotto_errors).

##### Example 15-16. generic_lotto_errors.py: errors reported by Mypy

```
from
```

[![^1]

Upon instantiation of `LottoBlower[int]`, Mypy flags the `float`.

[![^2]

When calling `.load('ABC')`, Mypy explains why a `str` won’t do: `str.__iter__` returns an `Iterator[str]`, but `LottoBlower[int]` requires an `Iterator[int]`.

[Example 15-17](#ex_generic_lotto) is the implementation.

##### Example 15-17. generic_lotto.py: a generic lottery blower class

```
import
```

[![^1]

Generic class declarations often use multiple inheritance, because we need to subclass `Generic` to declare the formal type parameters—in this case, `T`.

[![^2]

The `items` argument in `__init__` is of type `Iterable[T]`, which becomes `Iterable[int]` when an instance is declared as `LottoBlower[int]`.

[![^3]

The `load` method is likewise constrained.

[![^4]

The return type of `T` now becomes `int` in a `LottoBlower[int]`.

[![^5]

No type variable here.

[![^6]

Finally, `T` sets the type of the items in the returned `tuple`.

###### Tip

The [“User-defined generic types”](https://fpy.li/15-29) section of the `typing` module documentation is short, presents good examples, and provides a few more details that I do not cover here.

Now that we’ve seen how to implement a generic class, let’s define the terminology to talk about generics.