# Further Reading

The next chapters continue our exploration of programming with function objects. [Chapter 8](ch08.html#type_hints_in_def_ch) is devoted to type hints in function parameters and return values. [Chapter 9](ch09.html#closures_and_decorators) dives into function decorators—a special kind of higher-order function—and the closure mechanism that makes them work. [Chapter 10](ch10.html#rethinking_design_patterns) shows how first-class functions can simplify some classic object-oriented design patterns.

In _The Python Language Reference_, [“3.2. The standard type hierarchy”](https://fpy.li/7-10) presents the nine callable types, along with all the other built-in types.

Chapter 7 of the _[Python Cookbook](https://fpy.li/pycook3)_, 3rd ed. (O’Reilly), by David Beazley and Brian K. Jones, is an excellent complement to the current chapter as well as [Chapter 9](ch09.html#closures_and_decorators) of this book, covering mostly the same concepts with a different approach.

See [PEP 3102—Keyword-Only Arguments](https://fpy.li/pep3102) if you are interested in the rationale and use cases for that feature.

A great introduction to functional programming in Python is A. M. Kuchling’s [“Python Functional Programming HOWTO”](https://fpy.li/7-5). The main focus of that text, however, is the use of iterators and generators, which are the subject of [Chapter 17](ch17.html#iterables2generators).

The StackOverflow question [“Python: Why is functools.partial necessary?”](https://fpy.li/7-12) has a highly informative (and funny) reply by Alex Martelli, coauthor of the classic _Python in a Nutshell_ (O’Reilly).

Reflecting on the question “Is Python a functional language?”, I created one of my favorite talks, “Beyond Paradigms,” which I presented at PyCaribbean, PyBay, and PyConDE. See the [slides](https://fpy.li/7-13) and [video](https://fpy.li/7-14) from the Berlin presentation—where I met Miroslav Šedivý and Jürgen Gmach, two of the technical reviewers of this book.

##### Soapbox

Is Python a Functional Language?

Sometime in the year 2000 I attended a Zope workshop at Zope Corporation in the United States when Guido van Rossum dropped by the classroom (he was not the instructor). In the Q&A that followed, somebody asked him which features of Python were borrowed from other languages. Guido’s answer: “Everything that is good in Python was stolen from other languages.”

Shriram Krishnamurthi, professor of Computer Science at Brown University, starts his [“Teaching Programming Languages in a Post-Linnaean Age” paper](https://fpy.li/7-15) with this:

> Programming language “paradigms” are a moribund and tedious legacy of a bygone age. Modern language designers pay them no respect, so why do our courses slavishly adhere to them?

In that paper, Python is mentioned by name in this passage:

> What else to make of a language like Python, Ruby, or Perl? Their designers have no patience for the niceties of these Linnaean hierarchies; they borrow features as they wish, creating mélanges that utterly defy characterization.

Krishnamurthi argues that instead of trying to classify languages in some taxonomy, it’s more useful to consider them as aggregations of features. His ideas inspired my talk “Beyond Paradigms,” mentioned at the end of [“Further Reading”](#first_cls_fn_further_reading_sec).

Even if it was not Guido’s goal, endowing Python with first-class functions opened the door to functional programming. In his post, [“Origins of Python’s _Functional_ Features”](https://fpy.li/7-1), he says that `map`, `filter`, and `reduce` were the motivation for adding `lambda` to Python in the first place. All of these features were contributed together by Amrit Prem for Python 1.0 in 1994, according to [Misc/HISTORY](https://fpy.li/7-17) in the CPython source code.

Functions like `map`, `filter`, and `reduce` first appeared in Lisp, the original functional language. However, Lisp does not limit what can be done inside a `lambda`, because everything in Lisp is an expression. Python uses a statement-oriented syntax in which expressions cannot contain statements, and many language constructs are statements—including `try/catch`, which is what I miss most often when writing `lambda`s. This is the price to pay for Python’s highly readable syntax.[^5] Lisp has many strengths, but readability is not one of them.

Ironically, stealing the list comprehension syntax from another functional language—Haskell—significantly diminished the need for `map` and `filter`, and also for `lambda`.

Besides the limited anonymous function syntax, the biggest obstacle to wider adoption of functional programming idioms in Python is the lack of tail-call elimination, an optimization that allows memory-efficient computation of a function that makes a recursive call at the “tail” of its body. In another blog post, [“Tail Recursion Elimination”](https://fpy.li/7-18), Guido gives several reasons why such optimization is not a good fit for Python. That post is a great read for the technical arguments, but even more so because the first three and most important reasons given are usability issues. It is no accident that Python is a pleasure to use, learn, and teach. Guido made it so.

So there you have it: Python is not, by design, a functional language—whatever that means. Python just borrows a few good ideas from functional languages.

The Problem with Anonymous Functions

Beyond the Python-specific syntax constraints, anonymous functions have a serious drawback in any language: they have no name.

I am only half joking here. Stack traces are easier to read when functions have names. Anonymous functions are a handy shortcut, people have fun coding with them, but sometimes they get carried away—especially if the language and environment encourage deep nesting of anonymous functions, like JavaScript on Node.js do. Lots of nested anonymous functions make debugging and error handling hard. Asynchronous programming in Python is more structured, perhaps because the limited `lambda` syntax prevents its abuse and forces a more explicit approach. Promises, futures, and deferreds are concepts used in modern asynchronous APIs. Along with coroutines, they provide an escape from the so-called “callback hell.” I promise to write more about asynchronous programming in the future, but this subject must be deferred to [Chapter 21](ch21.html#async_ch).

[^1]: , from Guido’s _The History of Python_ blog.

[^2]: .

[^3]:  Why build a `BingoCage` when we already have `random.choice`? The `choice` function may return the same item multiple times, because the picked item is not removed from the collection given. Calling `BingoCage` never returns duplicate results—as long as the instance is filled with unique values.

[^4]:  for _functools.py_ reveals that `functools.partial` is implemented in C and is used by default. If that is not available, a pure-Python implementation of `partial` is available since Python 3.4.

[^5]:  There is also the problem of lost indentation when pasting code to web forums, but I digress.