# Anonymous Functions

The `lambda` keyword creates an anonymous function within a Python expression.

However, the simple syntax of Python limits the body of `lambda` functions to be pure expressions. In other words, the body cannot contain other Python statements such as `while`, `try`, etc. Assignment with `=` is also a statement, so it cannot occur in a `lambda`. The new assignment expression syntax using `:=` can be used—but if you need it, your `lambda` is probably too complicated and hard to read, and it should be refactored into a regular function using `def`.

The best use of anonymous functions is in the context of an argument list for a higher-order function. For example, [Example 7-7](#higher_order_sort_reverse_lambda) is the rhyme index example from [Example 7-4](#higher_order_sort_reverse) rewritten with `lambda`, without defining a `reverse` function.

##### Example 7-7. Sorting a list of words by their reversed spelling using `lambda`

```
>>> 
```

Outside the limited context of arguments to higher-order functions, anonymous functions are rarely useful in Python. The syntactic restrictions tend to make nontrivial `lambdas` either unreadable or unworkable. If a `lambda` is hard to read, I strongly advise you follow Fredrik Lundh’s refactoring advice.

##### Fredrik Lundh’s lambda Refactoring Recipe

If you find a piece of code hard to understand because of a `lambda`, Fredrik Lundh suggests this refactoring procedure:

1. Write a comment explaining what the heck that `lambda` does.
    
2. Study the comment for a while, and think of a name that captures the essence of the comment.
    
3. Convert the `lambda` to a `def` statement, using that name.
    
4. Remove the comment.
    

These steps are quoted from the [“Functional Programming HOWTO”](https://fpy.li/7-5), a must read.

The `lambda` syntax is just syntactic sugar: a `lambda` expression creates a function object just like the `def` statement. That is just one of several kinds of callable objects in Python. The following section reviews all of them.