# Further Reading

Guido van Rossum wrote a good defense of operator overloading in [“Why operators are useful”](https://fpy.li/16-10). Trey Hunner blogged [“Tuple ordering and deep comparisons in Python”](https://fpy.li/16-11), arguing that the rich comparison operators in Python are more flexible and powerful than programmers may realize when coming from other languages.

Operator overloading is one area of Python programming where `isinstance` tests are common. The best practice around such tests is goose typing, covered in [“Goose Typing”](ch13.html#goose_typing_sec). If you skipped that, make sure to read it.

The main reference for the operator special methods is the [“Data Model” chapter](https://fpy.li/dtmodel) of the Python documentation. Another relevant reading is [“9.1.2.2. Implementing the arithmetic operations”](https://fpy.li/16-7) in the `numbers` module of _The Python Standard Library_.

A clever example of operator overloading appeared in the [`pathlib`](https://fpy.li/16-13) package, added in Python 3.4. Its `Path` class overloads the `/` operator to build filesystem paths from strings, as shown in this example from the documentation:

```
>>> 
```

Another nonarithmetic example of operator overloading is in the [Scapy](https://fpy.li/16-14) library, used to “send, sniff, dissect, and forge network packets.” In Scapy, the `/` operator builds packets by stacking fields from different network layers. See [“Stacking layers”](https://fpy.li/16-15) for details.

If you are about to implement comparison operators, study `functools.total_ordering`. That is a class decorator that automatically generates methods for all rich comparison operators in any class that defines at least a couple of them. See the [functools module docs](https://fpy.li/16-16).

If you are curious about operator method dispatching in languages with dynamic typing, two seminal readings are [“A Simple Technique for Handling Multiple Polymorphism”](https://fpy.li/16-17) by Dan Ingalls (member of the original Smalltalk team), and [“Arithmetic and Double Dispatching in Smalltalk-80”](https://fpy.li/16-18) by Kurt J. Hebel and Ralph Johnson (Johnson became famous as one of the authors of the original _Design Patterns_ book). Both papers provide deep insight into the power of polymorphism in languages with dynamic typing, like Smalltalk, Python, and Ruby. Python does not use double dispatching for handling operators as described in those articles. The Python algorithm using forward and reverse operators is easier for user-defined classes to support than double dispatching, but requires special handling by the interpreter. In contrast, classic double dispatching is a general technique you can use in Python or any object-oriented language beyond the specific context of infix operators, and in fact Ingalls, Hebel, and Johnson use very different examples to describe it.

The article, [“The C Family of Languages: Interview with Dennis Ritchie, Bjarne Stroustrup, and James Gosling”](https://fpy.li/16-1), from which I quoted the epigraph for this chapter, appeared in _Java Report_, 5(7), July 2000, and _C++ Report_, 12(7), July/August 2000, along with two other snippets I used in this chapter’s “Soapbox” (next). If you are into programming language design, do yourself a favor and read that interview.

##### Soapbox

Operator Overloading: Pros and Cons

James Gosling, quoted at the start of this chapter, made the conscious decision to leave operator overloading out when he designed Java. In that same interview ([“The C Family of Languages: Interview with Dennis Ritchie, Bjarne Stroustrup, and James Gosling”](https://fpy.li/16-20)) he says:

> Probably about 20 to 30 percent of the population think of operator overloading as the spawn of the devil; somebody has done something with operator overloading that has just really ticked them off, because they’ve used like + for list insertion and it makes life really, really confusing. A lot of that problem stems from the fact that there are only about half a dozen operators you can sensibly overload, and yet there are thousands or millions of operators that people would like to define—so you have to pick, and often the choices conflict with your sense of intuition.

Guido van Rossum picked the middle way in supporting operator overloading: he did not leave the door open for users creating new arbitrary operators like `<=>` or `:-)`, which prevents a Tower of Babel of custom operators, and allows the Python parser to be simple. Python also does not let you overload the operators of the built-in types, another limitation that promotes readability and predictable performance.

Gosling goes on to say:

> Then there’s a community of about 10 percent that have actually used operator overloading appropriately and who really care about it, and for whom it’s actually really important; this is almost exclusively people who do numerical work, where the notation is very important to appealing to people’s intuition, because they come into it with an intuition about what the + means, and the ability to say “a + b” where a and b are complex numbers or matrices or something really does make sense.

Of course, there are benefits to disallowing operator overloading in a language. I’ve seen the argument that C is better than C++ for systems programming because operator overloading in C++ can make costly operations seem trivial. Two successful modern languages that compile to binary executables made opposite choices: Go doesn’t have operator overloading, but [Rust does](https://fpy.li/16-21).

But overloaded operators, when used sensibly, do make code easier to read and write. It’s a great feature to have in a modern high-level language.

A Glimpse at Lazy Evaluation

If you look closely at the traceback in [Example 16-9](#ex_vector_error_iter_not_add), you’ll see evidence of the [_lazy_](https://fpy.li/16-22) evaluation of generator expressions. [Example 16-20](#ex_vector_error_iter_not_add_repeat) is that same traceback, now with callouts.

##### Example 16-20. Same as [Example 16-9](#ex_vector_error_iter_not_add)

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

The `Vector` call gets a generator expression as its `components` argument. No problem at this stage.

[![^2]

The `components` genexp is passed to the `array` constructor. Within the `array` constructor, Python tries to iterate over the genexp, causing the evaluation of the first item `a + b`. That’s when the `TypeError` occurs.

[![^3]

The exception propagates to the `Vector` constructor call, where it is reported.

This shows how the generator expression is evaluated at the latest possible moment, and not where it is defined in the source code.

In contrast, if the `Vector` constructor was invoked as `Vector([a + b for a, b in pairs])`, then the exception would happen right there, because the list comprehension tried to build a `list` to be passed as the argument to the `Vector()` call. The body of `Vector.__init__` would not be reached at all.

[Chapter 17](ch17.html#iterables2generators) will cover generator expressions in detail, but I did not want to let this accidental demonstration of their lazy nature go unnoticed.

[^1]: .

[^2]: .

[^3]:  for an explanation of the bitwise not.

[^4]:  in the `numbers` module docs mention “forward” and “reverse” methods, and I find this terminology better, because “forward” and “reversed” clearly name each of the directions, while “reflected” doesn’t have an obvious opposite.

[^5]:  for a discussion of the problem.

[^6]:  in the CPython source code.

[^7]: ` method needs is to iterate over its argument.