# Operator Overloading 101

Operator overloading allows user-defined objects to interoperate with infix operators such as `+` and `|`, or unary operators like `-` and `~`. More generally, function invocation (`()`), attribute access (`.`), and item access/slicing (`[]`) are also operators in Python, but this chapter covers unary and infix operators.

Operator overloading has a bad name in some circles. It is a language feature that can be (and has been) abused, resulting in programmer confusion, bugs, and unexpected performance bottlenecks. But if used well, it leads to pleasurable APIs and readable code. Python strikes a good balance among flexibility, usability, and safety by imposing some limitations:

- We cannot change the meaning of the operators for the built-in types.
    
- We cannot create new operators, only overload existing ones.
    
- A few operators can’t be overloaded: `is`, `and`, `or`, `not` (but the bitwise `&`, `|`, `~`, can).
    

In [Chapter 12](ch12.html#user_defined_sequences), we already had one infix operator in `Vector`: `==`, supported by the `__eq__` method. In this chapter, we’ll improve the implementation of `__eq__` to better handle operands of types other than `Vector`. However, the rich comparison operators (`==`, `!=`, `>`, `<`, `>=`, `<=`) are special cases in operator overloading, so we’ll start by overloading four arithmetic operators in `Vector`: the unary `-` and `+`, followed by the infix `+` and `*`.

Let’s start with the easiest topic: unary operators.