# Unary Operators

_The Python Language Reference_, [“6.5. Unary arithmetic and bitwise operations”](https://fpy.li/16-2) lists three unary operators, shown here with their associated special methods:

`-`, implemented by `__neg__`

Arithmetic unary negation. If `x` is `-2` then `-x == 2`.

`+`, implemented by `__pos__`

Arithmetic unary plus. Usually `x == +x`, but there are a few cases when that’s not true. See [“When x and +x Are Not Equal”](#when_plus_x_sec) if you’re curious.

`~`, implemented by `__invert__`

Bitwise not, or bitwise inverse of an integer, defined as `~x == -(x+1)`. If `x` is `2` then `~x == -3`.[^3]

The [“Data Model” chapter](https://fpy.li/16-3) of _The Python Language Reference_ also lists the `abs()` built-in function as a unary operator. The associated special method is `__abs__`, as we’ve seen before.

It’s easy to support the unary operators. Simply implement the appropriate special method, which will take just one argument: `self`. Use whatever logic makes sense in your class, but stick to the general rule of operators: always return a new object. In other words, do not modify the receiver (`self`), but create and return a new instance of a suitable type.

In the case of `-` and `+`, the result will probably be an instance of the same class as `self`. For unary `+`, if the receiver is immutable you should return `self`; otherwise, return a copy of `self`. For `abs()`, the result should be a scalar number.

As for `~`, it’s difficult to say what would be a sensible result if you’re not dealing with bits in an integer. In the [_pandas_](https://fpy.li/pandas) data analysis package, the tilde negates boolean filtering conditions; see [“Boolean indexing”](https://fpy.li/16-4) in the _pandas_ documentation for examples.

As promised before, we’ll implement several new operators on the `Vector` class from [Chapter 12](ch12.html#user_defined_sequences). [Example 16-1](#ex_vector_v6_unary) shows the `__abs__` method we already had in [Example 12-16](ch12.html#ex_vector_v5), and the newly added `__neg__` and `__pos__` unary operator method.

##### Example 16-1. vector_v6.py: unary operators - and + added to [Example 12-16](ch12.html#ex_vector_v5)

```
    
```

[![^1]

To compute `-v`, build a new `Vector` with every component of `self` negated.

[![^2]

To compute `+v`, build a new `Vector` with every component of `self`.

Recall that `Vector` instances are iterable, and the `Vector.__init__` takes an iterable argument, so the implementations of `__neg__` and `__pos__` are short and sweet.

We’ll not implement `__invert__`, so if the user tries `~v` on a `Vector` instance, Python will raise `TypeError` with a clear message: “bad operand type for unary ~: `'Vector'`.”

The following sidebar covers a curiosity that may help you win a bet about unary `+` someday.

##### When x and +x Are Not Equal

Everybody expects that `x == +x`, and that is true almost all the time in Python, but I found two cases in the standard library where `x != +x`.

The first case involves the `decimal.Decimal` class. You can have `x != +x` if `x` is a `Decimal` instance created in an arithmetic context and `+x` is then evaluated in a context with different settings. For example, `x` is calculated in a context with a certain precision, but the precision of the context is changed and then `+x` is evaluated. See [Example 16-2](#ex_unary_plus_decimal) for a demonstration.

##### Example 16-2. A change in the arithmetic context precision may cause `x` to differ from `+x`

```
>>
```

[![^1]

Get a reference to the current global arithmetic context.

[![^2]

Set the precision of the arithmetic context to `40`.

[![^3]

Compute `1/3` using the current precision.

[![^4]

Inspect the result; there are 40 digits after the decimal point.

[![^5]

`one_third == +one_third` is `True`.

[![^6]

Lower precision to `28`—the default for `Decimal` arithmetic.

[![^7]

Now `one_third == +one_third` is `False`.

[![^8]

Inspect `+one_third`; there are 28 digits after the `'.'` here.

The fact is that each occurrence of the expression `+one_third` produces a new `Decimal` instance from the value of `one_third`, but using the precision of the current arithmetic context.

You can find the second case where `x != +x` in the [`collections.Counter` documentation](https://fpy.li/16-5). The `Counter` class implements several arithmetic operators, including infix `+` to add the tallies from two `Counter` instances. However, for practical reasons, `Counter` addition discards from the result any item with a negative or zero count. And the prefix `+` is a shortcut for adding an empty `Counter`, therefore it produces a new `Counter`, preserving only the tallies that are greater than zero. See [Example 16-3](#ex_unary_plus_counter).

##### Example 16-3. Unary + produces a new `Counter` without zeroed or negative tallies

```
>>> 
```

As you can see, `+ct` returns a counter where all tallies are greater than zero.

Now, back to our regularly scheduled programming.