# Overloading * for Scalar Multiplication

What does `Vector([1, 2, 3]) * x` mean? If `x` is a number, that would be a scalar product, and the result would be a new `Vector` with each component multiplied by `x`—also known as an elementwise multiplication:

```
>>> 
```

###### Note

Another kind of product involving `Vector` operands would be the dot product of two vectors—or matrix multiplication, if you take one vector as a 1 × N matrix and the other as an N × 1 matrix. We will implement that operator in our `Vector` class in [“Using @ as an Infix Operator”](#matmul_operator_sec).

Back to our scalar product, again we start with the simplest `__mul__` and `__rmul__` methods that could possibly work:

    `# inside the Vector class`

    `def` `__mul__``(``self``,` `scalar``):`
        `return` `Vector``(``n` `*` `scalar` `for` `n` `in` `self``)`

    `def` `__rmul__``(``self``,` `scalar``):`
        `return` `self` `*` `scalar`

Those methods do work, except when provided with incompatible operands. The `scalar` argument has to be a number that when multiplied by a `float` produces another `float` (because our `Vector` class uses an `array` of floats internally). So a `complex` number will not do, but the scalar can be an `int`, a `bool` (because `bool` is a subclass of `int`), or even a `fractions.Fraction` instance. In [Example 16-11](#ex_vector_v7), the `__mul__` method does not make an explicit type check on `scalar`, but instead converts it into a `float`, and returns `NotImplemented` if that fails. That’s a clear example of duck typing.

##### Example 16-11. vector_v7.py: operator `*` methods added

```
class
```

[![^1]

If `scalar` cannot be converted to `float`…

[![^2]

…we don’t know how to handle it, so we return `NotImplemented` to let Python try `__rmul__` on the `scalar` operand.

[![^3]

In this example, `__rmul__` works fine by just performing `self * scalar`, delegating to the `__mul__` method.

With [Example 16-11](#ex_vector_v7), we can multiply `Vectors` by scalar values of the usual, and not so usual, numeric types:

```
>>> 
```

Now that we can multiply `Vector` by scalars, let’s see how to implement `Vector` by `Vector` products.

###### Note

In the first edition of _Fluent Python_, I used goose typing in [Example 16-11](#ex_vector_v7): I checked the `scalar` argument of `__mul__` with `isinstance(scalar, numbers.Real)`. Now I avoid using the `numbers` ABCs because they are not supported by PEP 484, and using types at runtime that cannot also be statically checked seems a bad idea to me.

Alternatively, I could have checked against the `typing.SupportsFloat` protocol that we saw in [“Runtime Checkable Static Protocols”](ch13.html#runtime_checkable_proto_sec). I chose duck typing in that example because I think fluent Pythonistas should be comfortable with that coding pattern.

On the other hand, `__matmul__` in [Example 16-12](#ex_vector_v7_matmul) is a good example of goose typing, new in this second edition.