# Augmented Assignment Operators

Our `Vector` class already supports the augmented assignment operators `+=` and `*=`. That’s because augmented assignment works with immutable receivers by creating new instances and rebinding the lefthand variable.

[Example 16-16](#eq_demo_augm_assign_immutable) shows them in action.

##### Example 16-16. Using `+=` and `*=` with `Vector` instances

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Create an alias so we can inspect the `Vector([1, 2, 3])` object later.

[![^2]

Remember the ID of the initial `Vector` bound to `v1`.

[![^3]

Perform augmented addition.

[![^4]

The expected result…

[![^5]

…but a new `Vector` was created.

[![^6]

Inspect `v1_alias` to confirm the original `Vector` was not altered.

[![^7]

Perform augmented multiplication.

[![^8]

Again, the expected result, but a new `Vector` was created.

If a class does not implement the in-place operators listed in [Table 16-1](#infix_operator_names_tbl), the augmented assignment operators work as syntactic sugar: `a += b` is evaluated exactly as `a = a + b`. That’s the expected behavior for immutable types, and if you have `__add__`, then `+=` will work with no additional code.

However, if you do implement an in-place operator method such as `__iadd__`, that method is called to compute the result of `a += b`. As the name says, those operators are expected to change the lefthand operand in place, and not create a new object as the result.

###### Warning

The in-place special methods should never be implemented for immutable types like our `Vector` class. This is fairly obvious, but worth stating anyway.

To show the code of an in-place operator, we will extend the `BingoCage` class from [Example 13-9](ch13.html#ex_tombola_bingo) to implement `__add__` and `__iadd__`.

We’ll call the subclass `AddableBingoCage`. [Example 16-17](#demo_addable_bingo_add) is the behavior we want for the `+` operator.

##### Example 16-17. The `+` operator creates a new `AddableBingoCage` instance

```
    
```

[![^1]

Create a `globe` instance with five items (each of the `vowels`).

[![^2]

Pop one of the items, and verify it is one of the `vowels`.

[![^3]

Confirm that the `globe` is down to four items.

[![^4]

Create a second instance, with three items.

[![^5]

Create a third instance by adding the previous two. This instance has seven items.

[![^6]

Attempting to add an `AddableBingoCage` to a `list` fails with `TypeError`. That error message is produced by the Python interpreter when our `__add__` method returns `NotImplemented`.

Because an `AddableBingoCage` is mutable, [Example 16-18](#demo_addable_bingo_iadd) shows how it will work when we implement `__iadd__`.

##### Example 16-18. An existing `AddableBingoCage` can be loaded with `+=` (continuing from [Example 16-17](#demo_addable_bingo_add))

```
    
```

[![^1]

Create an alias so we can check the identity of the object later.

[![^2]

`globe` has four items here.

[![^3]

An `AddableBingoCage` instance can receive items from another instance of the same class.

[![^4]

The righthand operand of `+=` can also be any iterable.

[![^5]

Throughout this example, `globe` has always referred to the same object as `globe_orig`.

[![^6]

Trying to add a noniterable to an `AddableBingoCage` fails with a proper error message.

Note that the `+=` operator is more liberal than `+` with regard to the second operand. With `+`, we want both operands to be of the same type (`AddableBingoCage`, in this case), because if we accepted different types, this might cause confusion as to the type of the result. With the `+=`, the situation is clearer: the lefthand object is updated in place, so there’s no doubt about the type of the result.

###### Tip

I validated the contrasting behavior of `+` and `+=` by observing how the `list` built-in type works. Writing `my_list + x`, you can only concatenate one `list` to another `list`, but if you write `my_list += x`, you can extend the lefthand `list` with items from any iterable `x` on the righthand side. This is how the `list.extend()` method works: it accepts any iterable argument.

Now that we are clear on the desired behavior for `AddableBingoCage`, we can look at its implementation in [Example 16-19](#ex_addable_bingo). Recall that `BingoCage`, from [Example 13-9](ch13.html#ex_tombola_bingo), is a concrete subclass of the `Tombola` ABC from [Example 13-7](ch13.html#ex_tombola_abc).

##### Example 16-19. bingoaddable.py: `AddableBingoCage` extends `BingoCage` to support `+` and `+=`

```
from
```

[![^1]

`AddableBingoCage` extends `BingoCage`.

[![^2]

Our `__add__` will only work with an instance of `Tombola` as the second operand.

[![^3]

In `__iadd__`, retrieve items from `other`, if it is an instance of `Tombola`.

[![^4]

Otherwise, try to obtain an iterator over `other`.[^7]

[![^5]

If that fails, raise an exception explaining what the user should do. When possible, error messages should explicitly guide the user to the solution.

[![^6]

If we got this far, we can load the `other_iterable` into `self`.

[![^7]

Very important: augmented assignment special methods of mutable objects must return `self`. That’s what users expect.

We can summarize the whole idea of in-place operators by contrasting the `return` statements that produce results in `__add__` and `__iadd__` in [Example 16-19](#ex_addable_bingo):

`__add__`

The result is produced by calling the constructor `AddableBingoCage` to build a new instance.

`__iadd__`

The result is produced by returning `self`, after it has been modified.

To wrap up this example, a final observation on [Example 16-19](#ex_addable_bingo): by design, no `__radd__` was coded in `AddableBingoCage`, because there is no need for it. The forward method `__add__` will only deal with righthand operands of the same type, so if Python is trying to compute `a + b`, where `a` is an `AddableBingoCage` and `b` is not, we return `NotImplemented`—maybe the class of `b` can make it work. But if the expression is `b + a` and `b` is not an `AddableBingoCage`, and it returns `NotImplemented`, then it’s better to let Python give up and raise `TypeError` because we cannot handle `b`.

###### Tip

In general, if a forward infix operator method (e.g., `__mul__`) is designed to work only with operands of the same type as `self`, it’s useless to implement the corresponding reverse method (e.g., `__rmul__`) because that, by definition, will only be invoked when dealing with an operand of a different type.

This concludes our exploration of operator overloading in Python.