# Further Reading

> When it comes to reading clarity, properly-done composition is superior to inheritance. Since code is much more often read than written, avoid subclassing in general, but especially don’t mix the various types of inheritance, and don’t use subclassing for code sharing.
> 
> Hynek Schlawack, Subclassing in Python Redux

During the final review of this book, technical reviewer Jürgen Gmach recommended Hynek Schlawack’s post [“Subclassing in Python Redux”](https://fpy.li/14-37)—the source of the preceding quote. Schlawack is the author of the popular _attrs_ package, and was a core contributor to the Twisted asynchronous programming framework, a project started by Glyph Lefkowitz in 2002. Over time, the core team realized they had overused subclassing in their design, according to Schlawack. His post is long, and cites other important posts and talks. Highly recommended.

In that same conclusion, Hynek Schlawack wrote: “Don’t forget that more often than not, a function is all you need.” I agree, and that is precisely why _Fluent Python_ covers functions in depth before classes and inheritance. My goal was to show how much you can accomplish with functions leveraging existing classes from the standard library, before creating your own classes.

Subclassing built-ins, the `super` function, and advanced features like descriptors and metaclasses are all introduced in Guido van Rossum’s paper [“Unifying types and classes in Python 2.2”](https://fpy.li/descr101). Nothing really important has changed in these features since then. Python 2.2 was an amazing feat of language evolution, adding several powerful new features in a coherent whole, without breaking backward compatibility. The new features were 100% opt-in. To use them, we just had to explicitly subclass `object`—directly or indirectly—to create a so-called “new style class.” In Python 3, every class subclasses `object`.

The [_Python Cookbook_, 3rd ed.](https://fpy.li/pycook3) by David Beazley and Brian K. Jones (O’Reilly) has several recipes showing the use of `super()` and mixin classes. You can start from the illuminating section [“8.7. Calling a Method on a Parent Class”](https://fpy.li/14-38), and follow the internal references from there.

Raymond Hettinger’s post [“Python’s super() considered super!”](https://fpy.li/14-39) explains the workings of `super` and multiple inheritance in Python from a positive perspective. It was written in response to [“Python’s Super is nifty, but you can’t use it (Previously: Python’s Super Considered Harmful)”](https://fpy.li/14-40) by James Knight. Martijn Pieters’ response to [“How to use super() with one argument?”](https://fpy.li/14-41) includes a concise and deep explanation of `super`, including its relationship with descriptors, a concept we’ll only study in [Chapter 23](ch23.html#attribute_descriptors). That’s the nature of `super`. It is simple to use in basic use cases, but is a powerful and complex tool that touches some of Python’s most advanced dynamic features, rarely found in other languages.

Despite the titles of those posts, the problem is not really the `super` built-in—which in Python 3 is not as ugly as it was in Python 2. The real issue is multiple inheritance, which is inherently complicated and tricky. Michele Simionato goes beyond criticizing and actually offers a solution in his [“Setting Multiple Inheritance Straight”](https://fpy.li/14-42): he implements traits, an explict form of mixins that originated in the Self language. Simionato has a long series of blog posts about multiple inheritance in Python, including [“The wonders of cooperative inheritance, or using super in Python 3”](https://fpy.li/14-43); [“Mixins considered harmful,” part 1](https://fpy.li/14-44) and [part 2](https://fpy.li/14-45); and [“Things to Know About Python Super,” part 1](https://fpy.li/14-46), [part 2](https://fpy.li/14-47), and [part 3](https://fpy.li/14-48). The oldest posts use the Python 2 `super` syntax, but are still relevant.

I read the first edition of Grady Booch et al., _Object-Oriented Analysis and Design_, 3rd ed., and highly recommend it as a general primer on object-oriented thinking, independent of programming language. It is a rare book that covers multiple inheritance without prejudice.

Now more than ever it’s fashionable to avoid inheritance, so here are two references about how to do that. Brandon Rhodes wrote [“The Composition Over Inheritance Principle”](https://fpy.li/14-49), part of his excellent [_Python Design Patterns_](https://fpy.li/14-50) guide. Augie Fackler and Nathaniel Manista presented [“The End Of Object Inheritance & The Beginning Of A New Modularity”](https://fpy.li/14-51) at PyCon 2013. Fackler and Manista talk about organizing systems around interfaces and functions that handle objects implementing those interfaces, avoiding the tight coupling and failure modes of classes and inheritance. That reminds me a lot of the Go way, but they advocate it for Python.

##### Soapbox

Think about the Classes You Really Need

> [We] started to push on the inheritance idea as a way to let novices build on frameworks that could only be designed by experts.
> 
> Alan Kay, “The Early History of Smalltalk”[^15]

The vast majority of programmers write applications, not frameworks. Even those who do write frameworks are likely to spend a lot (if not most) of their time writing applications. When we write applications, we normally don’t need to code class hierarchies. At most, we write classes that subclass from ABCs or other classes provided by the framework. As application developers, it’s very rare that we need to write a class that will act as the superclass of another. The classes we code are almost always leaf classes (i.e., leaves of the inheritance tree).

If, while working as an application developer, you find yourself building multilevel class hierarchies, it’s likely that one or more of the following applies:

- You are reinventing the wheel. Go look for a framework or library that provides components you can reuse in your application.
    
- You are using a badly designed framework. Go look for an alternative.
    - You are overengineering. Remember the _KISS principle_.
    
- You became bored coding applications and decided to start a new framework. Congratulations and good luck!
    

It’s also possible that all of the above apply to your situation: you became bored and decided to reinvent the wheel by building your own overengineered and badly designed framework, which is forcing you to code class after class to solve trivial problems. Hopefully you are having fun, or at least getting paid for it.

Misbehaving Built-Ins: Bug or Feature?

The built-in `dict`, `list`, and `str` types are essential building blocks of Python itself, so they must be fast—any performance issues in them would severely impact pretty much everything else. That’s why CPython adopted the shortcuts that cause its built-in methods to misbehave by not cooperating with methods overridden by subclasses. A possible way out of this dilemma would be to offer two implementations for each of those types: one “internal,” optimized for use by the interpreter, and an external, easily extensible one.

But wait, this is what we have already: `UserDict`, `UserList`, and `UserString` are not as fast as the built-ins but are easily extensible. The pragmatic approach taken by CPython means we also get to use, in our own applications, the highly optimized implementations that are hard to subclass. Which makes sense, considering that it’s not so often that we need a custom mapping, list, or string, but we use `dict`, `list`, and `str` every day. We just need to be aware of the trade-offs involved.

Inheritance Across Languages

Alan Kay coined the term “object-oriented,” and Smalltalk had only single inheritance, although there are forks with various forms of multiple inheritance support, including the modern Squeak and Pharo Smalltalk dialects that support traits—a language construct that fulfills the role of a mixin class, while avoiding some of the issues with multiple inheritance.

The first popular language to implement multiple inheritance was C++, and the feature was abused enough that Java—intended as a C++ replacement—was designed without support for multiple inheritance of implementation (i.e., no mixin classes). That is, until Java 8 introduced default methods that make interfaces very similar to the abstract classes used to define interfaces in C++ and in Python. After Java, probably the most widely deployed JVM language is Scala, and it implements traits.

Other languages supporting traits are the latest stable versions of PHP and Groovy, as well as Rust and Raku—the language formerly known as Perl 6.[^16] So it’s fair to say that traits are trendy in 2021.

Ruby offers an original take on multiple inheritance: it does not support it, but introduces mixins as a language feature. A Ruby class can include a module in its body, so the methods defined in the module become part of the class implementation. This is a “pure” form of mixin, with no inheritance involved, and it’s clear that a Ruby mixin has no influence on the type of the class where it’s used. This provides the benefits of mixins, while avoiding many of its usual problems.

Two new object-oriented languages that are getting a lot of attention severely limit inheritance: Go and Julia. Both are about programming “objects,” and support [polymorphism](https://fpy.li/14-53), but they avoid the term “class.”

Go has no inheritance at all. Julia has a type hierarchy but subtypes cannot inherit structure, only behaviors, and only abstract types can be subtyped. In addition, Julia methods are implemented using multiple dispatch—a more advanced form of the mechanism we saw in [“Single Dispatch Generic Functions”](ch09.html#generic_functions).

[^1]: . Thanks to my friend Christiano Anderson, who shared this reference as I was writing this chapter.

[^2]:  I only changed the docstring in the example, because the original is misleading. It says: “Store items in the order the keys were last added,” but that is not what the clearly named `LastUpdatedOrderedDict` does.

[^3]: .

[^4]:  It is interesting to note that C++ has the notion of virtual and nonvirtual methods. Virtual methods are late bound, but nonvirtual methods are bound at compile time. Although every method that we can write in Python is late bound like a virtual method, built-in objects written in C seem to have nonvirtual methods by default, at least in CPython.

[^5]:  repository.

[^6]:  for details.

[^7]: . The content of the `__mro__` attribute is what matters during normal usage of a class.

[^8]: .

[^9]:  in the official Java Tutorial.

[^10]:  Django programmers know that the `as_view` class method is the most visible part of the `View` interface, but it’s not relevant to us here.

[^11]: . It’s dynamic because the `View` class does not force subclasses to implement all handlers, but `dispatch` checks at runtime if a concrete handler is available for the specific request.

[^12]:  The principle appears on p. 20 of the introduction to the book.

[^13]: , p. 109.

[^14]:  annotation for variables or attributes that should not be reassigned or overridden.

[^15]: . Thanks to my friend Christiano Anderson, who shared this reference as I was writing this chapter.

[^16]:  with no shadow of deprecation because of the language formerly known as Perl 6.”