## Freezing Arguments with functools.partial

The `functools` module provides several higher-order functions. We saw `reduce` in [“Modern Replacements for map, filter, and reduce”](#map_filter_reduce). Another is `partial`: given a callable, it produces a new callable with some of the arguments of the original callable bound to predetermined values. This is useful to adapt a function that takes one or more arguments to an API that requires a callback with fewer arguments. [Example 7-16](#ex_partial_mul) is a trivial demonstration.

##### Example 7-16. Using `partial` to use a two-argument function where a one-argument callable is required

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Create new `triple` function from `mul`, binding the first positional argument to `3`.

[![^2]

Test it.

[![^3]

Use `triple` with `map`; `mul` would not work with `map` in this example.

A more useful example involves the `unicode.normalize` function that we saw in [“Normalizing Unicode for Reliable Comparisons”](ch04.html#normalizing_unicode). If you work with text from many languages, you may want to apply `unicode.normalize('NFC', s)` to any string `s` before comparing or storing it. If you do that often, it’s handy to have an `nfc` function to do so, as in [Example 7-17](#ex_partial_nfc).

##### Example 7-17. Building a convenient Unicode normalizing function with `partial`

```
>>> 
```

`partial` takes a callable as first argument, followed by an arbitrary number of positional and keyword arguments to bind.

[Example 7-18](#partial_demo) shows the use of `partial` with the `tag` function from [Example 7-9](#tagger_ex), to freeze one positional argument and one keyword argument.

##### Example 7-18. Demo of `partial` applied to the `function tag` from [Example 7-9](#tagger_ex)

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Import `tag` from [Example 7-9](#tagger_ex) and show its ID.

[![^2]

Create the `picture` function from `tag` by fixing the first positional argument with `'img'` and the `class_` keyword argument with `'pic-frame'`.

[![^3]

`picture` works as expected.

[![^4]

`partial()` returns a `functools.partial` object.[^4]

[![^5]

A `functools.partial` object has attributes providing access to the original function and the fixed arguments.

The `functools.partialmethod` function does the same job as `partial`, but is designed to work with methods.

The `functools` module also includes higher-order functions designed to be used as function decorators, such as `cache` and `singledispatch`, among others. Those functions are covered in [Chapter 9](ch09.html#closures_and_decorators), which also explains how to implement custom decorators.