## The operator Module

Often in functional programming it is convenient to use an arithmetic operator as a function. For example, suppose you want to multiply a sequence of numbers to calculate factorials without using recursion. To perform summation, you can use `sum`, but there is no equivalent function for multiplication. You could use `reduce`—as we saw in [“Modern Replacements for map, filter, and reduce”](#map_filter_reduce)—but this requires a function to multiply two items of the sequence. [Example 7-11](#fact_reduce_lambda_ex) shows how to solve this using `lambda`.

##### Example 7-11. Factorial implemented with `reduce` and an anonymous function

```
from
```

The `operator` module provides function equivalents for dozens of operators so you don’t have to code trivial functions like `lambda a, b: a*b`. With it, we can rewrite [Example 7-11](#fact_reduce_lambda_ex) as [Example 7-12](#fact_reduce_operator_ex).

##### Example 7-12. Factorial implemented with `reduce` and `operator.mul`

```
from
```

Another group of one-trick `lambda`s that `operator` replaces are functions to pick items from sequences or read attributes from objects: `itemgetter` and `attrgetter` are factories that build custom functions to do that.

[Example 7-13](#itemgetter_demo) shows a common use of `itemgetter`: sorting a list of tuples by the value of one field. In the example, the cities are printed sorted by country code (field 1). Essentially, `itemgetter(1)` creates a function that, given a collection, returns the item at index 1. That’s easier to write and read than `lambda fields: fields[1]`, which does the same thing.

##### Example 7-13. Demo of `itemgetter` to sort a list of tuples (data from [Example 2-8](ch02.html#ex_nested_tuple))

```
>>> 
```

If you pass multiple index arguments to `itemgetter`, the function it builds will return tuples with the extracted values, which is useful for sorting on multiple keys:

```
>>> 
```

Because `itemgetter` uses the `[]` operator, it supports not only sequences but also mappings and any class that implements `__getitem__`.

A sibling of `itemgetter` is `attrgetter`, which creates functions to extract object attributes by name. If you pass `attrgetter` several attribute names as arguments, it also returns a tuple of values. In addition, if any argument name contains a `.` (dot), `attrgetter` navigates through nested objects to retrieve the attribute. These behaviors are shown in [Example 7-14](#attrgetter_demo). This is not the shortest console session because we need to build a nested structure to showcase the handling of dotted attributes by `attrgetter`.

##### Example 7-14. Demo of `attrgetter` to process a previously defined list of `namedtuple` called `metro_data` (the same list that appears in [Example 7-13](#itemgetter_demo))

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Use `namedtuple` to define `LatLon`.

[![^2]

Also define `Metropolis`.

[![^3]

Build `metro_areas` list with `Metropolis` instances; note the nested tuple unpacking to extract `(lat, lon)` and use them to build the `LatLon` for the `coord` attribute of `Metropolis`.

[![^4]

Reach into element `metro_areas[0]` to get its latitude.

[![^5]

Define an `attrgetter` to retrieve the `name` and the `coord.lat` nested attribute.

[![^6]

Use `attrgetter` again to sort list of cities by latitude.

[![^7]

Use the `attrgetter` defined in ![^5] to show only the city name and latitude.

Here is a partial list of functions defined in `operator` (names starting with `_` are omitted, because they are mostly implementation details):

```
>>> 
```

Most of the 54 names listed are self-evident. The group of names prefixed with `i` and the name of another operator—e.g., `iadd`, `iand`, etc.—correspond to the augmented assignment operators—e.g., `+=`, `&=`, etc. These change their first argument in place, if it is mutable; if not, the function works like the one without the `i` prefix: it simply returns the result of the operation.

Of the remaining `operator` functions, `methodcaller` is the last we will cover. It is somewhat similar to `attrgetter` and `itemgetter` in that it creates a function on the fly. The function it creates calls a method by name on the object given as argument, as shown in [Example 7-15](#methodcaller_demo).

##### Example 7-15. Demo of `methodcaller`: second test shows the binding of extra arguments

```
>>> 
```

The first test in [Example 7-15](#methodcaller_demo) is there just to show `methodcaller` at work, but if you need to use the `str.upper` as a function, you can just call it on the `str` class and pass a string as an argument, like this:

```
>>> 
```

The second test in [Example 7-15](#methodcaller_demo) shows that `methodcaller` can also do a partial application to freeze some arguments, like the `functools.partial` function does. That is our next subject.*Bold Text*opmod07