# Acknowledgments

I did not expect updating a Python book five years later to be such a major undertaking, but it was. Marta Mello, my beloved wife, was always there when I needed her. My dear friend Leonardo Rochael helped me from the earliest writing to the final technical review, including consolidating and double-checking the feedback from the other tech reviewers, readers, and editors. I honestly don’t know if I’d have made it without your support, Marta and Leo. Thank you so much!

Jürgen Gmach, Caleb Hattingh, Jess Males, Leonardo Rochael, and Miroslav Šedivý were the outstanding technical review team for the second edition. They reviewed the whole book. Bill Behrman, Bruce Eckel, Renato Oliveira, and Rodrigo Bernardo Pimentel reviewed specific chapters. Their many suggestions from different perspectives made the book much better.

Many readers sent corrections or made other contributions during the early release phase, including: Guilherme Alves, Christiano Anderson, Konstantin Baikov, K. Alex Birch, Michael Boesl, Lucas Brunialti, Sergio Cortez, Gino Crecco, Chukwuerika Dike, Juan Esteras, Federico Fissore, Will Frey, Tim Gates, Alexander Hagerman, Chen Hanxiao, Sam Hyeong, Simon Ilincev, Parag Kalra, Tim King, David Kwast, Tina Lapine, Wanpeng Li, Guto Maia, Scott Martindale, Mark Meyer, Andy McFarland, Chad McIntire, Diego Rabatone Oliveira, Francesco Piccoli, Meredith Rawls, Michael Robinson, Federico Tula Rovaletti, Tushar Sadhwani, Arthur Constantino Scardua, Randal L. Schwartz, Avichai Sefati, Guannan Shen, William Simpson, Vivek Vashist, Jerry Zhang, Paul Zuradzki—and others who did not want to be named, sent corrections after I delivered the draft, or are omitted because I failed to record their names—sorry.

During my research, I learned about typing, concurrency, pattern matching, and metaprogramming while interacting with Michael Albert, Pablo Aguilar, Kaleb Barrett, David Beazley, J. S. O. Bueno, Bruce Eckel, Martin Fowler, Ivan Levkivskyi, Alex Martelli, Peter Norvig, Sebastian Rittau, Guido van Rossum, Carol Willing, and Jelle Zijlstra.

O’Reilly editors Jeff Bleiel, Jill Leonard, and Amelia Blevins made suggestions that improved the flow of the book in many places. Jeff Bleiel and production editor Danny Elfanbaum supported me throughout this long marathon.

The insights and suggestions of every one of them made the book better and more accurate. Inevitably, there will still be bugs of my own creation in the final product. I apologize in advance.

Finally, I want to extend my heartfelt thanks to my colleagues at Thoughtworks Brazil—and especially to my sponsor, Alexey Bôas—who supported this project in many ways, all the way.

Of course, everyone who helped me understand Python and write the first edition now deserves double thanks. There would be no second edition without a successful first.

## Acknowledgments for the First Edition

The Bauhaus chess set by Josef Hartwig is an example of excellent design: beautiful, simple, and clear. Guido van Rossum, son of an architect and brother of a master font designer, created a masterpiece of language design. I love teaching Python because it is beautiful, simple, and clear.

Alex Martelli and Anna Ravenscroft were the first people to see the outline of this book and encouraged me to submit it to O’Reilly for publication. Their books taught me idiomatic Python and are models of clarity, accuracy, and depth in technical writing. [Alex’s 6,200+ Stack Overflow posts](https://fpy.li/p-7) are a fountain of insights about the language and its proper use.

Martelli and Ravenscroft were also technical reviewers of this book, along with Lennart Regebro and Leonardo Rochael. Everyone in this outstanding technical review team has at least 15 years of Python experience, with many contributions to high-impact Python projects in close contact with other developers in the community. Together they sent me hundreds of corrections, suggestions, questions, and opinions, adding tremendous value to the book. Victor Stinner kindly reviewed [Chapter 21](ch21.html#async_ch), bringing his expertise as an `asyncio` maintainer to the technical review team. It was a great privilege and a pleasure to collaborate with them over these past several months.

Editor Meghan Blanchette was an outstanding mentor, helping me improve the organization and flow of the book, letting me know when it was boring, and keeping me from delaying even more. Brian MacDonald edited chapters in [Part II](part02.html#function_objects_part) while Meghan was away. I enjoyed working with them, and with everyone I’ve contacted at O’Reilly, including the Atlas development and support team (Atlas is the O’Reilly book publishing platform, which I was fortunate to use to write this book).

Mario Domenech Goulart provided numerous, detailed suggestions starting with the first early release. I also received valuable feedback from Dave Pawson, Elias Dorneles, Leonardo Alexandre Ferreira Leite, Bruce Eckel, J. S. Bueno, Rafael Gonçalves, Alex Chiaranda, Guto Maia, Lucas Vido, and Lucas Brunialti.

Over the years, a number of people urged me to become an author, but the most persuasive were Rubens Prates, Aurelio Jargas, Rudá Moura, and Rubens Altimari. Mauricio Bussab opened many doors for me, including my first real shot at writing a book. Renzo Nuccitelli supported this writing project all the way, even if that meant a slow start for our partnership at [_python.pro.br_](https://fpy.li/p-8).

The wonderful Brazilian Python community is knowledgeable, generous, and fun. [The Python Brasil group](https://fpy.li/p-9) has thousands of people, and our national conferences bring together hundreds, but the most influential in my journey as a Pythonista were Leonardo Rochael, Adriano Petrich, Daniel Vainsencher, Rodrigo RBP Pimentel, Bruno Gola, Leonardo Santagada, Jean Ferri, Rodrigo Senra, J. S. Bueno, David Kwast, Luiz Irber, Osvaldo Santana, Fernando Masanori, Henrique Bastos, Gustavo Niemayer, Pedro Werneck, Gustavo Barbieri, Lalo Martins, Danilo Bellini, and Pedro Kroger.

Dorneles Tremea was a great friend (incredibly generous with his time and knowledge), an amazing hacker, and the most inspiring leader of the Brazilian Python Association. He left us too early.

My students over the years taught me a lot through their questions, insights, feedback, and creative solutions to problems. Érico Andrei and Simples Consultoria made it possible for me to focus on being a Python teacher for the first time.

Martijn Faassen was my Grok mentor and shared invaluable insights with me about Python and Neanderthals. His work and that of Paul Everitt, Chris McDonough, Tres Seaver, Jim Fulton, Shane Hathaway, Lennart Regebro, Alan Runyan, Alexander Limi, Martijn Pieters, Godefroid Chapelle, and others from the Zope, Plone, and Pyramid planets have been decisive in my career. Thanks to Zope and surfing the first web wave, I was able to start making a living with Python in 1998. José Octavio Castro Neves was my partner in the first Python-centric software house in Brazil.

I have too many gurus in the wider Python community to list them all, but besides those already mentioned, I am indebted to Steve Holden, Raymond Hettinger, A.M. Kuchling, David Beazley, Fredrik Lundh, Doug Hellmann, Nick Coghlan, Mark Pilgrim, Martijn Pieters, Bruce Eckel, Michele Simionato, Wesley Chun, Brandon Craig Rhodes, Philip Guo, Daniel Greenfeld, Audrey Roy, and Brett Slatkin for teaching me new and better ways to teach Python.

Most of these pages were written in my home office and in two labs: CoffeeLab and Garoa Hacker Clube. [CoffeeLab](https://fpy.li/p-10) is the caffeine-geek headquarters in Vila Madalena, São Paulo, Brazil. [Garoa Hacker Clube](https://fpy.li/p-11) is a hackerspace open to all: a community lab where anyone can freely try out new ideas.

The Garoa community provided inspiration, infrastructure, and slack. I think Aleph would enjoy this book.

My mother, Maria Lucia, and my father, Jairo, always supported me in every way. I wish he was here to see the book; I am glad I can share it with her.

My wife, Marta Mello, endured 15 months of a husband who was always working, but remained supportive and coached me through some critical moments in the project when I feared I might drop out of the marathon.

Thank you all, for everything.

[^1]: .