# Asynchronous Context Managers

In [“Context Managers and with Blocks”](ch18.html#context_managers_sec), we saw how an object can be used to run code before and after the body of a `with` block, if its class provides the `__enter__` and `__exit__` methods.

Now, consider [Example 21-4](#asyncpg_transaction_no_context_ex), from the [_asyncpg_](https://fpy.li/21-10) _asyncio_-compatible PostgreSQL driver [documentation on transactions](https://fpy.li/21-11).

##### Example 21-4. Sample code from the documentation of the _asyncpg_ PostgreSQL driver

```
tr
```

A database transaction is a natural fit for the context manager protocol: the transaction has to be started, data is changed with `connection.execute`, and then a rollback or commit must happen, depending on the outcome of the changes.

In an asynchronous driver like _asyncpg_, the setup and wrap-up need to be coroutines so that other operations can happen concurrently. However, the implementation of the classic `with` statement doesn’t support coroutines doing the work of `__enter__` or `__exit__`.

That’s why [PEP 492—Coroutines with async and await syntax](https://fpy.li/pep492) introduced the `async with` statement, which works with asynchronous context managers: objects implementing the `__aenter__` and `__aexit__` methods as coroutines.

With `async with`, [Example 21-4](#asyncpg_transaction_no_context_ex) can be written like this other snippet from the [_asyncpg_ documentation](https://fpy.li/21-11):

```
async
```

In the [`asyncpg.Transaction` class](https://fpy.li/21-13), the `__aenter__` coroutine method does `await self.start()`, and the `__aexit__` coroutine awaits on private `__rollback` or `__commit` coroutine methods, depending on whether an exception occurred or not. Using coroutines to implement `Transaction` as an asynchronous context manager allows _asyncpg_ to handle many transactions concurrently.

# Caleb Hattingh on asyncpg

Another really great thing about _asyncpg_ is that it also works around PostgreSQL’s lack of high-concurrency support (it uses one server-side process per connection) by implementing a connection pool for internal connections to Postgres itself.

This means you don’t need additional tools like _pgbouncer_ as explained in the _asyncpg_ [documentation](https://fpy.li/21-14).[^6]

Back to _flags_asyncio.py_, the `AsyncClient` class of `httpx` is an asynchronous context manager, so it can use awaitables in its `__aenter__` and `__aexit__` special coroutine methods.

###### Note

[“Asynchronous generators as context managers”](#async_gen_context_mngr_sec) shows how to use Python’s `contextlib` to create an asynchronous context manager without having to write a class. That explanation comes later in this chapter because of a prerequisite topic: [“Asynchronous Generator Functions”](#async_gen_func_sec).

We’ll now enhance the _asyncio_ flag download example with a progress bar, which will lead us to explore a bit more of the _asyncio_ API.