## Modern Replacements for map, filter, and reduce

Functional languages commonly offer the `map`, `filter`, and `reduce` higher-order functions (sometimes with different names). The `map` and `filter` functions are still built-ins in Python 3, but since the introduction of list comprehensions and generator expressions, they are not as important. A listcomp or a genexp does the job of `map` and `filter` combined, but is more readable. Consider [Example 7-5](#reduce_x_sum).

##### Example 7-5. Lists of factorials produced with `map` and `filter` compared to alternatives coded as list comprehensions

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Build a list of factorials from 0! to 5!.

[![^2]

Same operation, with a list comprehension.

[![^3]

List of factorials of odd numbers up to 5!, using both `map` and `filter`.

[![^4]

List comprehension does the same job, replacing `map` and `filter`, and making `lambda` unnecessary.

In Python 3, `map` and `filter` return generators—a form of iterator—so their direct substitute is now a generator expression (in Python 2, these functions returned lists, therefore their closest alternative was a listcomp).

The `reduce` function was demoted from a built-in in Python 2 to the `functools` module in Python 3. Its most common use case, summation, is better served by the `sum` built-in available since Python 2.3 was released in 2003. This is a big win in terms of readability and performance (see [Example 7-6](#reduce_x_sum2)).

##### Example 7-6. Sum of integers up to 99 performed with `reduce` and `sum`

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Starting with Python 3.0, `reduce` is no longer a built-in.

[![^2]

Import `add` to avoid creating a function just to add two numbers.

[![^3]

Sum integers up to 99.

[![^4]

Same task with `sum`—no need to import and call `reduce` and `add`.

###### Note

The common idea of `sum` and `reduce` is to apply some operation to successive items in a series, accumulating previous results, thus reducing a series of values to a single value.

Other reducing built-ins are `all` and `any`:

`all(iterable)`

Returns `True` if there are no falsy elements in the iterable; `all([])` returns `True`.

`any(iterable)`

Returns `True` if any element of the `iterable` is truthy; `any([])` returns `False`.

I give a fuller explanation of `reduce` in [“Vector Take #4: Hashing and a Faster ==”](ch12.html#multi_hashing) where an ongoing example provides a meaningful context for the use of this function. The reducing functions are summarized later in the book when iterables are in focus, in [“Iterable Reducing Functions”](ch17.html#iterable_reducing_sec).

To use a higher-order function, sometimes it is convenient to create a small, . one-off function. That is why anonymous functions exist. We’ll cover them next.