## The Invalid Attribute Name Problem

The `FrozenJSON` code doesn’t handle attribute names that are Python keywords. For example, if you build an object like this:

```
>>> 
```

You won’t be able to read `student.class` because `class` is a reserved keyword in Python:

```
>>> 
```

You can always do this, of course:

```
>>> 
```

But the idea of `FrozenJSON` is to provide convenient access to the data, so a better solution is checking whether a key in the mapping given to `FrozenJSON.__init__` is a keyword, and if so, append an `_` to it, so the attribute can be read like this:

```
>>> 
```

This can be achieved by replacing the one-liner `__init__` from [Example 22-4](#ex_explore0) with the version in [Example 22-5](#ex_explore1).

##### Example 22-5. explore1.py: append an `_` to attribute names that are Python keywords

```
    
```

[![^1]

The `keyword.iskeyword(…)` function is exactly what we need; to use it, the `keyword` module must be imported, which is not shown in this snippet.

A similar problem may arise if a key in a JSON record is not a valid Python identifier:

```
>>> 
```

Such problematic keys are easy to detect in Python 3 because the `str` class provides the `s.isidentifier()` method, which tells you whether `s` is a valid Python identifier according to the language grammar. But turning a key that is not a valid identifier into a valid attribute name is not trivial. One solution would be to implement `__getitem__` to allow attribute access using notation like `x['2be']`. For the sake of simplicity, I will not worry about this issue.

After giving some thought to the dynamic attribute names, let’s turn to another essential feature of `FrozenJSON`: the logic of the `build` class method. `Frozen.JSON.build` is used by `__getattr__` to return a different type of object depending on the value of the attribute being accessed: nested structures are converted to `FrozenJSON` instances or lists of `FrozenJSON` instances.

Instead of a class method, the same logic could be implemented as the `__new__` special method, as we’ll see next.