## Flexible Object Creation with __new__

We often refer to `__init__` as the constructor method, but that’s because we adopted jargon from other languages. In Python, `__init__` gets `self` as the first argument, therefore the object already exists when `__init__` is called by the interpreter. Also, `__init__` cannot return anything. So it’s really an initializer, not a constructor.

When a class is called to create an instance, the special method that Python calls on that class to construct an instance is `__new__`. It’s a class method, but gets special treatment, so the `@classmethod` decorator is not applied to it. Python takes the instance returned by `__new__` and then passes it as the first argument `self` of `__init__`. We rarely need to code `__new__`, because the implementation inherited from `object` suffices for the vast majority of use cases.

If necessary, the `__new__` method can also return an instance of a different class. When that happens, the interpreter does not call `__init__`. In other words, Python’s logic for building an object is similar to this pseudocode:

```
# pseudocode for object construction
```

[Example 22-6](#ex_explore2) shows a variation of `FrozenJSON` where the logic of the former `build` class method was moved to `__new__`.

##### Example 22-6. explore2.py: using `__new__` instead of `build` to construct new objects that may or may not be instances of `FrozenJSON`

```
from
```

[![^1]

As a class method, the first argument `__new__` gets is the class itself, and the remaining arguments are the same that `__init__` gets, except for `self`.

[![^2]

The default behavior is to delegate to the `__new__` of a superclass. In this case, we are calling `__new__` from the `object` base class, passing `FrozenJSON` as the only argument.

[![^3]

The remaining lines of `__new__` are exactly as in the old `build` method.

[![^4]

This was where `FrozenJSON.build` was called before; now we just call the `FrozenJSON` class, which Python handles by calling `FrozenJSON.__new__`.

The `__new__` method gets the class as the first argument because, usually, the created object will be an instance of that class. So, in `FrozenJSON.__new__`, when the expression `super().__new__(cls)` effectively calls `object.__new__(FrozenJSON)`, the instance built by the `object` class is actually an instance of `FrozenJSON`. The `__class__` attribute of the new instance will hold a reference to `FrozenJSON`, even though the actual construction is performed by `object.__new__`, implemented in C, in the guts of the interpreter.

The OSCON JSON dataset is structured in a way that is not helpful for interactive exploration. For example, the event at index `40`, titled `'There *Will* Be Bugs'` has two speakers, `3471` and `5199`. Finding the names of the speakers is awkward, because those are serial numbers and the `Schedule.speakers` list is not indexed by them. To get each speaker, we must iterate over that list until we find a record with a matching serial number. Our next task is restructuring the data to prepare for automatic retrieval of linked records.