# Further Reading

The `concurrent.futures` package was contributed by Brian Quinlan, who presented it in a great talk titled [“The Future Is Soon!”](https://fpy.li/20-20) at PyCon Australia 2010. Quinlan’s talk has no slides; he shows what the library does by typing code directly in the Python console. As a motivating example, the presentation features a short video with XKCD cartoonist/programmer Randall Munroe making an unintended DoS attack on Google Maps to build a colored map of driving times around his city. The formal introduction to the library is [PEP 3148 - `futures` - execute computations asynchronously](https://fpy.li/pep3148). In the PEP, Quinlan wrote that the `concurrent.futures` library was “heavily influenced by the Java `java.util.concurrent` package.”

For additional resources covering `concurrent.futures`, please see [Chapter 19](ch19.html#concurrency_models_ch). All the references that cover Python’s `threading` and `multiprocessing` in [“Concurrency with Threads and Processes”](ch19.html#concurrency_further_threads_procs_sec) also cover `concurrent.futures`.

##### Soapbox

Thread Avoidance

> Concurrency: one of the most difficult topics in computer science (usually best avoided).
> 
> David Beazley, Python instructor and mad scientist[^8]

I agree with the apparently contradictory quotes by David Beazley and Michele Simionato at the start of this chapter.

I attended an undergraduate course about concurrency. All we did was [POSIX threads](https://fpy.li/20-22) programming. What I learned: I don’t want to manage threads and locks myself, for the same reason that I don’t want to manage memory allocation and deallocation. Those jobs are best carried out by the systems programmers who have the know-how, the inclination, and the time to get them right—hopefully. I am paid to develop applications, not operating systems. I don’t need all the fine-grained control of threads, locks, `malloc`, and `free`—see [“C dynamic memory allocation”](https://fpy.li/20-23).

That’s why I think the `concurrent.futures` package is interesting: it treats threads, processes, and queues as infrastructure at your service, not something you have to deal with directly. Of course, it’s designed with simple jobs in mind, the so-called embarrassingly parallel problems. But that’s a large slice of the concurrency problems we face when writing applications—as opposed to operating systems or database servers, as Simionato points out in that quote.

For “nonembarrassing” concurrency problems, threads and locks are not the answer either. Threads will never disappear at the OS level, but every programming language I’ve found exciting in the last several years provides higher-level, concurrency abstractions that are easier to use correctly, as the excellent [_Seven Concurrency Models in Seven Weeks_](https://fpy.li/20-24) book by Paul Butcher demonstrates. Go, Elixir, and Clojure are among them. Erlang—the implementation language of Elixir—is a prime example of a language designed from the ground up with concurrency in mind. Erlang doesn’t excite me for a simple reason: I find its syntax ugly. Python spoiled me that way.

José Valim, previously a Ruby on Rails core contributor, designed Elixir with a pleasant, modern syntax. Like Lisp and Clojure, Elixir implements syntactic macros. That’s a double-edged sword. Syntactic macros enable powerful DSLs, but the proliferation of sublanguages can lead to incompatible codebases and community fragmentation. Lisp drowned in a flood of macros, with each Lisp shop using its own arcane dialect. Standardizing around Common Lisp resulted in a bloated language. I hope José Valim can inspire the Elixir community to avoid a similar outcome. So far, it’s looking good. The [Ecto](https://fpy.li/20-25) database wrapper and query generator is a joy to use: a great example of using macros to create a flexible yet user-friendly DSL—Domain-Specific Language—for interacting with relational and nonrelational databases.

Like Elixir, Go is a modern language with fresh ideas. But, in some regards, it’s a conservative language, compared to Elixir. Go doesn’t have macros, and its syntax is simpler than Python’s. Go doesn’t support inheritance or operator overloading, and it offers fewer opportunities for metaprogramming than Python. These limitations are considered features. They lead to more predictable behavior and performance. That’s a big plus in the highly concurrent, mission-critical settings where Go aims to replace C++, Java, and Python.

While Elixir and Go are direct competitors in the high-concurrency space, their design philosophies appeal to different crowds. Both are likely to thrive. But in the history of programming languages, the conservative ones tend to attract more coders.

[^1]:  sensible comment about threads and other forms of concurrency.”

[^2]:  Particularly if your cloud provider rents machines by the second, regardless of how busy the CPUs are.

[^3]: .

[^4]: , a public-domain, US government publication. I copied them to my site to avoid the risk of launching a DOS attack on _cia.gov_.

[^5]:  Setting `follow_redirects=True` is not needed for this example, but I wanted to highlight this important difference between _HTTPX_ and _requests_. Also, setting `follow_redirects=True` in this example gives me flexibility to host the image files elsewhere in the future. I think the _HTTPX_ default setting of `follow_redirects​=False` is sensible because unexpected redirects can mask needless requests and complicate error diagnostics.

[^6]: ` finishes, particularly because `sleep` always releases the GIL, so Python may switch to another thread even if you sleep for 0s.

[^7]:  As of September 2021, there are no type hints in the current release of `tdqm`. That’s OK. The world will not end because of that. Thank Guido for optional typing!

[^8]:  tutorial presented at PyCon 2009.