## Deep and Shallow Copies of Arbitrary Objects

Working with shallow copies is not always a problem, but sometimes you need to make deep copies (i.e., duplicates that do not share references of embedded objects). The `copy` module provides the `deepcopy` and `copy` functions that return deep and shallow copies of arbitrary objects.

To illustrate the use of `copy()` and `deepcopy()`, [Example 6-8](#ex_bus1) defines a simple class, `Bus`, representing a school bus that is loaded with passengers and then picks up or drops off passengers on its route.

##### Example 6-8. Bus picks up and drops off passengers

```
class
```

Now, in the interactive [Example 6-9](#ex_bus1_console), we will create a `bus` object (`bus1`) and two clones—a shallow copy (`bus2`) and a deep copy (`bus3`)—to observe what happens as `bus1` drops off a student.

##### Example 6-9. Effects of using `copy` versus `deepcopy`

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Using `copy` and `deepcopy`, we create three distinct `Bus` instances.

[![^2]

After `bus1` drops `'Bill'`, he is also missing from `bus2`.

[![^3]

Inspection of the `passengers` attributes shows that `bus1` and `bus2` share the same list object, because `bus2` is a shallow copy of `bus1`.

[![^4]

`bus3` is a deep copy of `bus1`, so its `passengers` attribute refers to another list.

Note that making deep copies is not a simple matter in the general case. Objects may have cyclic references that would cause a naïve algorithm to enter an infinite loop. The `deepcopy` function remembers the objects already copied to handle cyclic references gracefully. This is demonstrated in [Example 6-10](#ex_cycle1).

##### Example 6-10. Cyclic references: `b` refers to `a`, and then is appended to `a`; `deepcopy` still manages to copy `a`

```
>>> 
```

Also, a deep copy may be too deep in some cases. For example, objects may refer to external resources or singletons that should not be copied. You can control the behavior of both `copy` and `deepcopy` by implementing the `__copy__()` and `__deepcopy__()` special methods, as described in the [`copy` module documentation](https://fpy.li/6-4).

The sharing of objects through aliases also explains how parameter passing works in Python, and the problem of using mutable types as parameter defaults. These issues will be covered next.