## Finding Strategies in a Module

Modules in Python are also first-class objects, and the standard library provides several functions to handle them. The built-in `globals` is described as follows in the Python docs:

`globals()`

Return a dictionary representing the current global symbol table. This is always the dictionary of the current module (inside a function or method, this is the module where it is defined, not the module from which it is called).

[Example 10-7](#ex_strategy_best2) is a somewhat hackish way of using `globals` to help `best_promo` automatically find the other available `*_promo` functions.

##### Example 10-7. The `promos` list is built by introspection of the module global namespace

```
from
```

[![^1]

Import the promotion functions so they are available in the global namespace.[^6]

[![^2]

Iterate over each item in the `dict` returned by `globals()`.

[![^3]

Select only values where the name ends with the `_promo` suffix and…

[![^4]

…filter out `best_promo` itself, to avoid an infinite recursion when `best_promo` is called.

[![^5]

No changes in `best_promo`.

Another way of collecting the available promotions would be to create a module and put all the strategy functions there, except for `best_promo`.

In [Example 10-8](#ex_strategy_best3), the only significant change is that the list of strategy functions is built by introspection of a separate module called `promotions`. Note that [Example 10-8](#ex_strategy_best3) depends on importing the `promotions` module as well as `inspect`, which provides high-level introspection functions.

##### Example 10-8. The `promos` list is built by introspection of a new `promotions` module

```
from
```

The function `inspect.getmembers` returns the attributes of an object—in this case, the `promotions` module—optionally filtered by a predicate (a boolean function). We use `inspect.isfunction` to get only the functions from the module.

[Example 10-8](#ex_strategy_best3) works regardless of the names given to the functions; all that matters is that the `promotions` module contains only functions that calculate discounts given orders. Of course, this is an implicit assumption of the code. If someone were to create a function with a different signature in the `promotions` module, then `best_promo` would break while trying to apply it to an order.

We could add more stringent tests to filter the functions, by inspecting their arguments for instance. The point of [Example 10-8](#ex_strategy_best3) is not to offer a complete solution, but to highlight one possible use of module introspection.

A more explicit alternative to dynamically collecting promotional discount functions would be to use a simple decorator. That’s next.