# Character Issues

The concept of “string” is simple enough: a string is a sequence of characters. The problem lies in the definition of “character.”

In 2021, the best definition of “character” we have is a Unicode character. Accordingly, the items we get out of a Python 3 `str` are Unicode characters, just like the items of a `unicode` object in Python 2—and not the raw bytes we got from a Python 2 `str`.

The Unicode standard explicitly separates the identity of characters from specific byte representations:

- The identity of a character—its _code point_—is a number from 0 to 1,114,111 (base 10), shown in the Unicode standard as 4 to 6 hex digits with a “U+” prefix, from U+0000 to U+10FFFF. For example, the code point for the letter A is U+0041, the Euro sign is U+20AC, and the musical symbol G clef is assigned to code point U+1D11E. About 13% of the valid code points have characters assigned to them in Unicode 13.0.0, the standard used in Python 3.10.0b4.
    

- The actual bytes that represent a character depend on the _encoding_ in use. An encoding is an algorithm that converts code points to byte sequences and vice versa. The code point for the letter A (U+0041) is encoded as the single byte `\x41` in the UTF-8 encoding, or as the bytes `\x41\x00` in UTF-16LE encoding. As another example, UTF-8 requires three bytes—`\xe2\x82\xac`—to encode the Euro sign (U+20AC), but in UTF-16LE the same code point is encoded as two bytes: `\xac\x20`.
    

Converting from code points to bytes is _encoding_; converting from bytes to code points is _decoding_. See [Example 4-1](#ex_encode_decode).

##### Example 4-1. Encoding and decoding

```
>>
```

[![^1]

The `str` `'café'` has four Unicode characters.

[![^2]

Encode `str` to `bytes` using UTF-8 encoding.

[![^3]

`bytes` literals have a `b` prefix.

[![^4]

`bytes` `b` has five bytes (the code point for “é” is encoded as two bytes in UTF-8).

[![^5]

Decode `bytes` to `str` using UTF-8 encoding.

###### Tip

If you need a memory aid to help distinguish `.decode()` from `.encode()`, convince yourself that byte sequences can be cryptic machine core dumps, while Unicode `str` objects are “human” text. Therefore, it makes sense that we _decode_ `bytes` to `str` to get human-readable text, and we _encode_ `str` to `bytes` for storage or transmission.

Although the Python 3 `str` is pretty much the Python 2 `unicode` type with a new name, the Python 3 `bytes` is not simply the old `str` renamed, and there is also the closely related `bytearray` type. So it is worthwhile to take a look at the binary sequence types before advancing to encoding/decoding issues.