# Chapter 22. Dynamic Attributes and Properties

> The crucial importance of properties is that their existence makes it perfectly safe and indeed advisable for you to expose public data attributes as part of your class’s public interface.
> 
> Martelli, Ravenscroft, and Holden, “Why properties are important”[^1]

Data attributes and methods are collectively known as _attributes_ in Python. A method is an attribute that is _callable_. _Dynamic attributes_ present the same interface as data attributes—i.e., `obj.attr`—but are computed on demand. This follows Bertrand Meyer’s _Uniform Access Principle_:

> All services offered by a module should be available through a uniform notation, which does not betray whether they are implemented through storage or through computation.[^2]

There are several ways to implement dynamic attributes in Python. This chapter covers the simplest ways: the `@property` decorator and the `__getattr__` special method.

A user-defined class implementing `__getattr__` can implement a variation of dynamic attributes that I call _virtual attributes_: attributes that are not explicitly declared anywhere in the source code of the class, and are not present in the instance `__dict__`, but may be retrieved elsewhere or computed on the fly whenever a user tries to read a nonexistent attribute like `obj.no_such_attr`.

Coding dynamic and virtual attributes is the kind of metaprogramming that framework authors do. However, in Python the basic techniques are straightforward, so we can use them in everyday data wrangling tasks. That’s how we’ll start this chapter.