# Coding a Property Factory

We’ll create a factory to create `quantity` properties—so named because the managed attributes represent quantities that can’t be negative or zero in the application. [Example 22-27](#lineitem_class_v2prop_class) shows the clean look of the `LineItem` class using two instances of `quantity` properties: one for managing the `weight` attribute, the other for `price`.

##### Example 22-27. bulkfood_v2prop.py: the `quantity` property factory in use

```
class
```

[![^1]

Use the factory to define the first custom property, `weight`, as a class attribute.

[![^2]

This second call builds another custom property, `price`.

[![^3]

Here the property is already active, making sure a negative or `0` `weight` is rejected.

[![^4]

The properties are also in use here, retrieving the values stored in the instance.

Recall that properties are class attributes. When building each `quantity` property, we need to pass the name of the `LineItem` attribute that will be managed by that specific property. Having to type the word `weight` twice in this line is unfortunate:

    `weight` `=` `quantity``(``'weight'``)`

But avoiding that repetition is complicated because the property has no way of knowing which class attribute name will be bound to it. Remember: the righthand side of an assignment is evaluated first, so when `quantity()` is invoked, the `weight` class attribute doesn’t even exist.

###### Note

Improving the `quantity` property so that the user doesn’t need to retype the attribute name is a nontrivial metaprogramming problem. We’ll solve that problem in [Chapter 23](ch23.html#attribute_descriptors).

[Example 22-28](#lineitem_class_v2prop) lists the implementation of the `quantity` property factory.[^11]

##### Example 22-28. bulkfood_v2prop.py: the `quantity` property factory

```
def
```

[![^1]

The `storage_name` argument determines where the data for each property is stored; for the `weight`, the storage name will be `'weight'`.

[![^2]

The first argument of the `qty_getter` could be named `self`, but that would be strange because this is not a class body; `instance` refers to the `LineItem` instance where the attribute will be stored.

[![^3]

`qty_getter` references `storage_name`, so it will be preserved in the closure of this function; the value is retrieved directly from the `instance.__dict__` to bypass the property and avoid an infinite recursion.

[![^4]

`qty_setter` is defined, also taking `instance` as first argument.

[![^5]

The `value` is stored directly in the `instance.__dict__`, again bypassing the property.

[![^6]

Build a custom property object and return it.

The bits of [Example 22-28](#lineitem_class_v2prop) that deserve careful study revolve around the `storage_name` variable. When you code each property in the traditional way, the name of the attribute where you will store a value is hardcoded in the getter and setter methods. But here, the `qty_getter` and `qty_setter` functions are generic, and they depend on the `storage_name` variable to know where to get/set the managed attribute in the instance `__dict__`. Each time the `quantity` factory is called to build a property, the `storage_name` must be set to a unique value.

The functions `qty_getter` and `qty_setter` will be wrapped by the `property` object created in the last line of the factory function. Later, when called to perform their duties, these functions will read the `storage_name` from their closures to determine where to retrieve/store the managed attribute values.

In [Example 22-29](#lineitem_class_v2prop_demo), I create and inspect a `LineItem` instance, exposing the storage attributes.

##### Example 22-29. bulkfood_v2prop.py: exploring properties and storage attributes

```
    >>> nutmeg = LineItem('Moluccan nutmeg', 8, 13.95)
```

[![^1]

Reading the `weight` and `price` through the properties shadowing the namesake instance attributes.

[![^2]

Using `vars` to inspect the `nutmeg` instance: here we see the actual instance attributes used to store the values.

Note how the properties built by our factory leverage the behavior described in [“Properties Override Instance Attributes”](#prop_override_instance): the `weight` property overrides the `weight` instance attribute so that every reference to `self.weight` or `nutmeg.weight` is handled by the property functions, and the only way to bypass the property logic is to access the instance `__dict__` directly.

The code in [Example 22-28](#lineitem_class_v2prop) may be a bit tricky, but it’s concise: it’s identical in length to the decorated getter/setter pair defining just the `weight` property in [Example 22-21](#lineitem_class_v2). The `LineItem` definition in [Example 22-27](#lineitem_class_v2prop_class) looks much better without the noise of the getter/setters.

In a real system, that same kind of validation may appear in many fields, across several classes, and the `quantity` factory would be placed in a utility module to be used over and over again. Eventually that simple factory could be refactored into a more extensible descriptor class, with specialized subclasses performing different validations. We’ll do that in [Chapter 23](ch23.html#attribute_descriptors).

Now let us wrap up the discussion of properties with the issue of attribute deletion.