# Handling Attribute Deletion

We can use the `del` statement to delete not only variables, but also attributes:

```
>>> 
```

In practice, deleting attributes is not something we do every day in Python, and the requirement to handle it with a property is even more unusual. But it is supported, and I can think of a silly example to demonstrate it.

In a property definition, the `@my_property.deleter` decorator wraps the method in charge of deleting the attribute managed by the property. As promised, silly [Example 22-30](#ex_black_knight) is inspired by the scene with the Black Knight from _Monty Python and the Holy Grail_.[^12]

##### Example 22-30. blackknight.py

```
class
```

The doctests in _blackknight.py_ are in [Example 22-31](#demo_black_knight).

##### Example 22-31. blackknight.py: doctests for [Example 22-30](#ex_black_knight) (the Black Knight never concedes defeat)

```
    >>> knight = BlackKnight()
```

Using the classic call syntax instead of decorators, the `fdel` argument configures the deleter function. For example, the `member` property would be coded like this in the body of the `BlackKnight` class:

    `member` `=` `property``(``member_getter``,` `fdel``=``member_deleter``)`

If you are not using a property, attribute deletion can also be handled by implementing the lower-level `__delattr__` special method, presented in [“Special Methods for Attribute Handling”](#special_methods_for_attr_sec). Coding a silly class with `__delattr__` is left as an exercise to the procrastinating reader.

Properties are a powerful feature, but sometimes simpler or lower-level alternatives are preferable. In the final section of this chapter, we’ll review some of the core APIs that Python offers for dynamic attribute programming.