## A Parameterized Registration Decorator

To make it easy to enable or disable the function registration performed by `register`, we’ll make it accept an optional `active` parameter which, if `False`, skips registering the decorated function. [Example 9-22](#registration_param_ex) shows how. Conceptually, the new `register` function is not a decorator but a decorator factory. When called, it returns the actual decorator that will be applied to the target function.

##### Example 9-22. To accept parameters, the new `register` decorator must be called as a function

```
registry
```

[![^1]

`registry` is now a `set`, so adding and removing functions is faster.

[![^2]

`register` takes an optional keyword argument.

[![^3]

The `decorate` inner function is the actual decorator; note how it takes a function as an argument.

[![^4]

Register `func` only if the `active` argument (retrieved from the closure) is `True`.

[![^5]

If `not active` and `func in registry`, remove it.

[![^6]

Because `decorate` is a decorator, it must return a function.

[![^7]

`register` is our decorator factory, so it returns `decorate`.

[![^8]

The `@register` factory must be invoked as a function, with the desired parameters.

[![^9]

If no parameters are passed, `register` must still be called as a function—`@register()`—i.e., to return the actual decorator, `decorate`.

The main point is that `register()` returns `decorate`, which is then applied to the decorated function.

The code in [Example 9-22](#registration_param_ex) is in a _registration_param.py_ module. If we import it, this is what we get:

```
>>> 
```

Note how only the `f2` function appears in the `registry`; `f1` does not appear because `active=False` was passed to the `register` decorator factory, so the `decorate` that was applied to `f1` did not add it to the `registry`.

If, instead of using the `@` syntax, we used `register` as a regular function, the syntax needed to decorate a function `f` would be `register()(f)` to add `f` to the `registry`, or `register(active=False)(f)` to not add it (or remove it). See [Example 9-23](#registration_param_demo) for a demo of adding and removing functions to the `registry`.

##### Example 9-23. Using the registration_param module listed in [Example 9-22](#registration_param_ex)

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

When the module is imported, `f2` is in the `registry`.

[![^2]

The `register()` expression returns `decorate`, which is then applied to `f3`.

[![^3]

The previous line added `f3` to the `registry`.

[![^4]

This call removes `f2` from the `registry`.

[![^5]

Confirm that only `f3` remains in the `registry`.

The workings of parameterized decorators are fairly involved, and the one we’ve just discussed is simpler than most. Parameterized decorators usually replace the decorated function, and their construction requires yet another level of nesting. Now we will explore the architecture of one such function pyramid.