## The Parameterized Clock Decorator

In this section, we’ll revisit the `clock` decorator, adding a feature: users may pass a format string to control the output of the clocked function report. See [Example 9-24](#clockdeco_param_ex).

###### Note

For simplicity, [Example 9-24](#clockdeco_param_ex) is based on the initial `clock` implementation from [Example 9-14](#ex_clockdeco0), and not the improved one from [Example 9-16](#ex_clockdeco2) that uses `@functools.wraps`, adding yet another function layer.

##### Example 9-24. Module clockdeco_param.py: the parameterized clock decorator

```
import
```

[![^1]

`clock` is our parameterized decorator factory.

[![^2]

`decorate` is the actual decorator.

[![^3]

`clocked` wraps the decorated function.

[![^4]

`_result` is the actual result of the decorated function.

[![^5]

`_args` holds the actual arguments of `clocked`, while `args` is `str` used for display.

[![^6]

`result` is the `str` representation of `_result`, for display.

[![^7]

Using `**locals()` here allows any local variable of `clocked` to be referenced in the `fmt`.[^10]

[![^8]

`clocked` will replace the decorated function, so it should return whatever that function returns.

[![^9]

`decorate` returns `clocked`.

[![^10]

`clock` returns `decorate`.

[![^11]

In this self test, `clock()` is called without arguments, so the decorator applied will use the default format `str`.

If you run [Example 9-24](#clockdeco_param_ex) from the shell, this is what you get:

$ python3 clockdeco_param.py
`[``0`.12412500s`]` snooze`(``0`.123`)` -> None
`[``0`.12411904s`]` snooze`(``0`.123`)` -> None
`[``0`.12410498s`]` snooze`(``0`.123`)` -> None

To exercise the new functionality, let’s have a look at Examples [9-25](#ex_clockdecoparam_demo1) and [9-26](#ex_clockdecoparam_demo2), which are two other modules using `clockdeco_param`, and the outputs they generate.

##### Example 9-25. clockdeco_param_demo1.py

```
import
```

Output of [Example 9-25](#ex_clockdecoparam_demo1):

$ python3 clockdeco_param_demo1.py
snooze: `0`.12414693832397461s
snooze: `0`.1241159439086914s
snooze: `0`.12412118911743164s

##### Example 9-26. clockdeco_param_demo2.py

```
import
```

Output of [Example 9-26](#ex_clockdecoparam_demo2):

$ python3 clockdeco_param_demo2.py
snooze`(``0`.123`)` `dt``=``0`.124s
snooze`(``0`.123`)` `dt``=``0`.124s
snooze`(``0`.123`)` `dt``=``0`.124s

###### Note

Lennart Regebro—a technical reviewer for the first edition—argues that decorators are best coded as classes implementing `__call__`, and not as functions like the examples in this chapter. I agree that approach is better for nontrivial decorators, but to explain the basic idea of this language feature, functions are easier to understand. See [“Further Reading”](#decorator_further), in particular, Graham Dumpleton’s blog and `wrapt` module for industrial-strength techniques when building decorators.

The next section shows an example in the style recommended by Regebro and Dumpleton.