## Best Practices for Protocol Design

After 10 years of experience with static duck typing in Go, it is clear that narrow protocols are more useful—often such protocols have a single method, rarely more than a couple of methods. Martin Fowler wrote a post defining [_role interface_](https://fpy.li/13-33), a useful idea to keep in mind when designing protocols.

Also, sometimes you see a protocol defined near the function that uses it—that is, defined in “client code” instead of being defined in a library. This is makes it easy to create new types to call that function, which is good for extensibility and testing with mocks.

The practices of narrow protocols and client-code protocols both avoid unnecessary tight coupling, in line with the [Interface Segregation Principle](https://fpy.li/13-34), which we can summarize as “Clients should not be forced to depend upon interfaces that they do not use.”

The page [“Contributing to typeshed”](https://fpy.li/13-35) recommends this naming convention for static protocols (the following three points are quoted verbatim):

- Use plain names for protocols that represent a clear concept (e.g., `Iterator`, `Container`).
    
- Use `SupportsX` for protocols that provide callable methods (e.g., `SupportsInt`, `SupportsRead`, `SupportsReadSeek`).[^21]
    
- Use `HasX` for protocols that have readable and/or writable attributes or getter/setter methods (e.g., `HasItems`, `HasFileno`).
    

The Go standard library has a naming convention that I like: for single method protocols, if the method name is a verb, append “-er” or “-or” to make it a noun. For example, instead of `SupportsRead`, have `Reader`. More examples include `Formatter`, `Animator`, and `Scanner`. For inspiration, see [“Go (Golang) Standard Library Interfaces (Selected)”](https://fpy.li/13-36) by Asuka Kenji.

One good reason to create minimalistic protocols is the ability to extend them later, if needed. We’ll now see that it’s not hard to create a derived protocol with an additional method.