## The numbers ABCs and Numeric Protocols

As we saw in [“The fall of the numeric tower”](ch08.html#numeric_tower_warning), the ABCs in the `numbers` package of the standard library work fine for runtime type checking.

If you need to check for an integer, you can use `isinstance(x, numbers.Integral)` to accept `int`, `bool` (which subclasses `int`) or other integer types that are provided by external libraries that register their types as virtual subclasses of the `numbers` ABCs. For example, NumPy has [21 integer types](https://fpy.li/13-39)—as well as several variations of floating-point types registered as `numbers.Real`, and complex numbers with various bit widths registered as `numbers.Complex`.

###### Tip

Somewhat surprisingly, `decimal.Decimal` is not registered as a virtual subclass of `numbers.Real`. The reason is that, if you need the precision of `Decimal` in your program, then you want to be protected from accidental mixing of decimals with floating-point numbers that are less precise.

Sadly, the numeric tower was not designed for static type checking. The root ABC—`numbers.Number`—has no methods, so if you declare `x: Number`, Mypy will not let you do arithmetic or call any methods on `x`.

If the `numbers` ABCs are not supported, what are the options?

A good place to look for typing solutions is the _typeshed_ project. As part of the Python standard library, the `statistics` module has a corresponding [_statistics.pyi_](https://fpy.li/13-40) stub file with type hints for on _typeshed_. There you’ll find the following definitions, which are used to annotate several functions:

```
_Number
```

That approach is correct, but limited. It does not support numeric types outside of the standard library, which the `numbers` ABCs do support at runtime—when the numeric types are registered as virtual subclasses.

The current trend is to recommend the numeric protocols provided by the `typing` module, which we discussed in [“Runtime Checkable Static Protocols”](#runtime_checkable_proto_sec).

Unfortunately, at runtime, the numeric protocols may let you down. As mentioned in [“Limitations of Runtime Protocol Checks”](#protocol_type_hints_ignored), the `complex` type in Python 3.9 implements `__float__`, but the method exists only to raise `TypeError` with an explicit message: “can’t convert complex to float.” It implements `__int__` as well, for the same reason. The presence of those methods makes `isinstance` return misleading results in Python 3.9. In Python 3.10, the methods of `complex` that unconditionally raised `TypeError` were removed.[^24]

On the other hand, NumPy’s complex types implement `__float__` and `__int__` methods that work, only issuing a warning when each of them is used for the first time:

```
>>> 
```

The opposite problem also happens: built-ins `complex`, `float`, and `int`, and also `numpy.float16` and `numpy.uint8`, don’t have a `__complex__` method, so `isinstance(x, SupportsComplex)` returns `False` for them.[^25] The NumPy complex types, such as `np.complex64`, do implement `__complex__` to convert to a built-in `complex`.

However, in practice, the `complex()` built-in constructor handles instances of all these types with no errors or warnings:

```
>>> 
```

This shows that `isinstance` checks against `SupportsComplex` suggest that those conversions to `complex` would fail, but they all succeed. In the typing-sig mailing list, Guido van Rossum pointed out that the built-in `complex` accepts a single argument, and that’s why those conversions work.

On the other hand, Mypy accepts arguments of all those six types in a call to a `to_complex()` function defined like this:

```
def
```

As I write this, NumPy has no type hints, so its number types are all `Any`.[^26]

In conclusion, although numeric types should not be hard to type check, the current situation is this: the type hints PEP 484 [eschews](https://fpy.li/cardxvi) the numeric tower and implicitly recommends that type checkers hardcode the subtype relationships among built-in `complex`, `float`, and `int`. Mypy does that, and it also pragmatically accepts that `int` and `float` are _consistent-with_ `SupportsComplex`, even though they don’t implement `__complex__`.

###### Tip

I only found unexpected results when using `isinstance` checks with numeric `Supports*` protocols while experimenting with conversions to or from `complex`. If you don’t use complex numbers, you can rely on those protocols instead of the `numbers` ABCs.

The main takeaways for this section are:

- The `numbers` ABCs are fine for runtime type checking, but unsuitable for static typing.
    
- The numeric static protocols `SupportsComplex`, `SupportsFloat`, etc. work well for static typing, but are unreliable for runtime type checking when complex numbers are involved.
    

We are now ready for a quick review of what we saw in this chapter.