## What Is Hashable

Here is part of the definition of hashable adapted from the [Python _Glossary_](https://fpy.li/3-3):

> An object is hashable if it has a hash code which never changes during its lifetime (it needs a `__hash__()` method), and can be compared to other objects (it needs an `__eq__()` method). Hashable objects which compare equal must have the same hash code.[^2]

Numeric types and flat immutable types `str` and `bytes` are all hashable. Container types are hashable if they are immutable and all contained objects are also hashable. A `frozenset` is always hashable, because every element it contains must be hashable by definition. A `tuple` is hashable only if all its items are hashable. See tuples `tt`, `tl`, and `tf`:

```
>>> 
```

The hash code of an object may be different depending on the version of Python, the machine architecture, and because of a _salt_ added to the hash computation for security reasons.[^3] The hash code of a correctly implemented object is guaranteed to be constant only within one Python process.

User-defined types are hashable by default because their hash code is their `id()`, and the `__eq__()` method inherited from the `object` class simply compares the object IDs. If an object implements a custom `__eq__()` that takes into account its internal state, it will be hashable only if its `__hash__()` always returns the same hash code. In practice, this requires that `__eq__()` and `__hash__()` only take into account instance attributes that never change during the life of the object.

Now let’s review the API of the most commonly used mapping types in Python: `dict`, `defaultdict`, and `OrderedDict`.