## Inserting or Updating Mutable Values

In line with Python’s _fail-fast_ philosophy, `dict` access with `d[k]` raises an error when `k` is not an existing key. Pythonistas know that `d.get(k, default)` is an alternative to `d[k]` whenever a default value is more convenient than handling `KeyError`. However, when you retrieve a mutable value and want to update it, there is a better way.

Consider a script to index text, producing a mapping where each key is a word, and the value is a list of positions where that word occurs, as shown in [Example 3-3](#index0_output_ex).

##### Example 3-3. Partial output from [Example 3-4](#index0_ex) processing the “Zen of Python”; each line shows a word and a list of occurrences coded as pairs: (`line_number`, `column_number`)

$ python3 index0.py zen.txt
a `[(``19`, `48``)`, `(``20`, `53``)]`
Although `[(``11`, `1``)`, `(``16`, `1``)`, `(``18`, `1``)]`
ambiguity `[(``14`, `16``)]`
and `[(``15`, `23``)]`
are `[(``21`, `12``)]`
aren `[(``10`, `15``)]`
at `[(``16`, `38``)]`
bad `[(``19`, `50``)]`
be `[(``15`, `14``)`, `(``16`, `27``)`, `(``20`, `50``)]`
beats `[(``11`, `23``)]`
Beautiful `[(``3`, `1``)]`
better `[(``3`, `14``)`, `(``4`, `13``)`, `(``5`, `11``)`, `(``6`, `12``)`, `(``7`, `9``)`, `(``8`, `11``)`, `(``17`, `8``)`, `(``18`, `25``)]`
...

[Example 3-4](#index0_ex) is a suboptimal script written to show one case where `dict.get` is not the best way to handle a missing key. I adapted it from an example by Alex Martelli.[^4]

##### Example 3-4. index0.py uses `dict.get` to fetch and update a list of word occurrences from the index (a better solution is in [Example 3-5](#index_ex))

```
"""Build an index mapping word -> list of occurrences"""
```

[![^1]

Get the list of occurrences for `word`, or `[]` if not found.

[![^2]

Append new location to `occurrences`.

[![^3]

Put changed `occurrences` into `index` dict; this entails a second search through the `index`.

[![^4]

In the `key=` argument of `sorted`, I am not calling `str.upper`, just passing a reference to that method so the `sorted` function can use it to normalize the words for sorting.[^5]

The three lines dealing with `occurrences` in [Example 3-4](#index0_ex) can be replaced by a single line using `dict.setdefault`. [Example 3-5](#index_ex) is closer to Alex Martelli’s code.

##### Example 3-5. index.py uses `dict.setdefault` to fetch and update a list of word occurrences from the index in a single line; contrast with [Example 3-4](#index0_ex)

```
"""Build an index mapping word -> list of occurrences"""
```

[![^1]

Get the list of occurrences for `word`, or set it to `[]` if not found; `setdefault` returns the value, so it can be updated without requiring a second search.

In other words, the end result of this line…

```
my_dict
```

…is the same as running…

```
if
```

…except that the latter code performs at least two searches for `key`—three if it’s not found—while `setdefault` does it all with a single lookup.

A related issue, handling missing keys on any lookup (and not only when inserting), is the subject of the next section.