## Using futures.as_completed

In order to integrate the _tqdm_ progress bar and handle errors on each request, the _flags2_threadpool.py_ script uses `futures.ThreadPoolExecutor` with the `futures.as_completed` function we’ve already seen. [Example 20-16](#flags2_threadpool_full) is the full listing of _flags2_threadpool.py_. Only the `download_many` function is implemented; the other functions are reused from _flags2_common.py_ and _flags2_sequential.py_.

##### Example 20-16. flags2_threadpool.py: full listing

```
from
```

[![^1]

Reuse `download_one` from `flags2_sequential` ([Example 20-14](#flags2_basic_http_ex)).

[![^2]

If the `-m/--max_req` command-line option is not given, this will be the maximum number of concurrent requests, implemented as the size of the thread pool; the actual number may be smaller if the number of flags to download is smaller.

[![^3]

`MAX_CONCUR_REQ` caps the maximum number of concurrent requests regardless of the number of flags to download or the `-m/--max_req` command-line option. It’s a safety precaution to avoid launching too many threads with their significant memory overhead.

[![^4]

Create the `executor` with `max_workers` set to `concur_req`, computed by the `main` function as the smaller of: `MAX_CONCUR_REQ`, the length of `cc_list`, or the value of the `-m/--max_req` command-line option. This avoids creating more threads than necessary.

[![^5]

This `dict` will map each `Future` instance—representing one download—with the respective country code for error reporting.

[![^6]

Iterate over the list of country codes in alphabetical order. The order of the results will depend on the timing of the HTTP responses more than anything, but if the size of the thread pool (given by `concur_req`) is much smaller than `len(cc_list)`, you may notice the downloads batched alphabetically.

[![^7]

Each call to `executor.submit` schedules the execution of one callable and returns a `Future` instance. The first argument is the callable, the rest are the arguments it will receive.

[![^8]

Store the `future` and the country code in the `dict`.

[![^9]

`futures.as_completed` returns an iterator that yields futures as each task is done.

[![^10]

If not in verbose mode, wrap the result of `as_completed` with the `tqdm` function to display the progress bar; because `done_iter` has no `len`, we must tell `tqdm` what is the expected number of items as the `total=` argument, so `tqdm` can estimate the work remaining.

[![^11]

Iterate over the futures as they are completed.

[![^12]

Calling the `result` method on a future either returns the value returned by the callable, or raises whatever exception was caught when the callable was executed. This method may block waiting for a resolution, but not in this example because `as_completed` only returns futures that are done.

[![^13]

Handle the potential exceptions; the rest of this function is identical to the sequential `download_many` in [Example 20-15](#flags2_dowload_many_seq)), except for the next callout.

[![^14]

To provide context for the error message, retrieve the country code from the `to_do_map` using the current `future` as key. This was not necessary in the sequential version because we were iterating over the list of country codes, so we knew the current `cc`; here we are iterating over the futures.

###### Tip

[Example 20-16](#flags2_threadpool_full) uses an idiom that is very useful with `futures.as_completed`: building a `dict` to map each future to other data that may be useful when the future is completed. Here the `to_do_map` maps each future to the country code assigned to it. This makes it easy to do follow-up processing with the result of the futures, despite the fact that they are produced out of order.

Python threads are well suited for I/O-intensive applications, and the `concurrent.futures` package makes it relatively simple to use for certain use cases. With `ProcessPoolExecutor`, you can also solve CPU-intensive problems on multiple cores—if the computations are [“embarrassingly parallel”](https://fpy.li/20-19). This concludes our basic introduction to `concurrent.futures`.