## Error Handling in the flags2 Examples

The common strategy in all three examples to deal with HTTP errors is that 404 errors (not found) are handled by the function in charge of downloading a single file (`download_one`). Any other exception propagates to be handled by the `download_many` function or the `supervisor` coroutine—in the `asyncio` example.

Once more, we’ll start by studying the sequential code, which is easier to follow—and mostly reused by the thread pool script. [Example 20-14](#flags2_basic_http_ex) shows the functions that perform the actual downloads in the _flags2_sequential.py_ and _flags2_threadpool.py_ scripts.

##### Example 20-14. flags2_sequential.py: basic functions in charge of downloading; both are reused in flags2_threadpool.py

```
from
```

[![^1]

Import the `tqdm` progress-bar display library, and tell Mypy to skip checking it.[^7]

[![^2]

Import a couple of functions and an `Enum` from the `flags2_common` module.

[![^3]

Raises `HTTPStetusError` if the HTTP status code is not in `range(200, 300)`.

[![^4]

`download_one` catches `HTTPStatusError` to handle HTTP code 404 specifically…

[![^5]

…by setting its local `status` to `DownloadStatus.NOT_FOUND`; `DownloadStatus` is an `Enum` imported from _flags2_common.py_.

[![^6]

Any other `HTTPStatusError` exception is re-raised to propagate to the caller.

[![^7]

If the `-v/--verbose` command-line option is set, the country code and status message are displayed; this is how you’ll see progress in verbose mode.

[Example 20-15](#flags2_dowload_many_seq) lists the sequential version of the `download_many` function. This code is straightforward, but it’s worth studying to contrast with the concurrent versions coming up. Focus on how it reports progress, handles errors, and tallies downloads.

##### Example 20-15. flags2_sequential.py: the sequential implementation of `download_many`

```
def
```

[![^1]

This `Counter` will tally the different download outcomes: `DownloadStatus.OK`, `DownloadStatus.NOT_FOUND`, or `DownloadStatus.ERROR`.

[![^2]

`cc_iter` holds the list of the country codes received as arguments, ordered alphabetically.

[![^3]

If not running in verbose mode, `cc_iter` is passed to `tqdm`, which returns an iterator yielding the items in `cc_iter` while also animating the progress bar.

[![^4]

Make successive calls to `download_one`.

[![^5]

HTTP status code exceptions raised by `get_flag` and not handled by `download_one` are handled here.

[![^6]

Other network-related exceptions are handled here. Any other exception will abort the script, because the `flags2_common.main` function that calls `download_many` has no `try/except`.

[![^7]

Exit the loop if the user hits Ctrl-C.

[![^8]

If no exception escaped `download_one`, clear the error message.

[![^9]

If there was an error, set the local `status` accordingly.

[![^10]

Increment the counter for that `status`.

[![^11]

In verbose mode, display the error message for the current country code, if any.

[![^12]

Return `counter` so that `main` can display the numbers in the final report.

We’ll now study the refactored thread pool example, _flags2_threadpool.py_.