## Sorting with the Unicode Collation Algorithm

James Tauber, prolific Django contributor, must have felt the pain and created [_pyuca_](https://fpy.li/4-17), a pure-Python implementation of the Unicode Collation Algorithm (UCA). [Example 4-20](#ex_pyuca_sort) shows how easy it is to use.

##### Example 4-20. Using the `pyuca.Collator.sort_key` method

```
>>> 
```

This is simple and works on GNU/Linux, macOS, and Windows, at least with my small sample.

`pyuca` does not take the locale into account. If you need to customize the sorting, you can provide the path to a custom collation table to the `Collator()` constructor. Out of the box, it uses [_allkeys.txt_](https://fpy.li/4-18), which is bundled with the project. That’s just a copy of the [Default Unicode Collation Element Table from _Unicode.org_](https://fpy.li/4-19).

# PyICU: Miro’s Recommendation for Unicode Sorting

(Tech reviewer Miroslav Šedivý is a polyglot and an expert on Unicode. This is what he wrote about _pyuca_.)

_pyuca_ has one sorting algorithm that does not respect the sorting order in individual languages. For instance, Ä in German is between A and B, while in Swedish it comes after Z. Have a look at [PyICU](https://fpy.li/4-20) that works like locale without changing the locale of the process. It is also needed if you want to change the case of iİ/ıI in Turkish. PyICU includes an extension that must be compiled, so it may be harder to install in some systems than _pyuca_, which is just Python.

By the way, that collation table is one of the many data files that comprise the Unicode database, our next subject.