# Further Reading

This chapter covered several special methods of the data model, so naturally the primary references are the same as the ones provided in [Chapter 1](ch01.html#data_model), which gave a high-level view of the same topic. For convenience, I’ll repeat those four earlier recommendations here, and add a few other ones:

The [“Data Model” chapter](https://fpy.li/dtmodel) of _The Python Language Reference_

Most of the methods we used in this chapter are documented in [“3.3.1. Basic customization”](https://fpy.li/11-12).

[_Python in a Nutshell_, 3rd ed.,](https://fpy.li/pynut3) by Alex Martelli, Anna Ravenscroft, and Steve Holden

Covers the special methods in depth.

[_Python Cookbook_, 3rd ed.](https://fpy.li/pycook3), by David Beazley and Brian K. Jones

Modern Python practices demonstrated through recipes. Chapter 8, “Classes and Objects,” in particular has several solutions related to discussions in this chapter.

_Python Essential Reference_, 4th ed., by David Beazley

Covers the data model in detail, even if only Python 2.6 and 3.0 are covered (in the fourth edition). The fundamental concepts are all the same and most of the Data Model APIs haven’t changed at all since Python 2.2, when built-in types and user-defined classes were unified.

In 2015—the year I finished the first edition of _Fluent Python_—Hynek Schlawack started the `attrs` package. From the `attrs` documentation:

> `attrs` is the Python package that will bring back the **joy** of **writing classes** by relieving you from the drudgery of implementing object protocols (aka dunder methods).

I mentioned `attrs` as a more powerful alternative to `@dataclass` in [“Further Reading”](ch05.html#further_data_class). The data class builders from [Chapter 5](ch05.html#data_class_ch) as well as `attrs` automatically equip your classes with several special methods. But knowing how to code those special methods yourself is still essential to understand what those packages do, to decide whether you really need them, and to override the methods they generate—when necessary.

In this chapter, we saw every special method related to object representation, except `__index__` and `__fspath__`. We’ll discuss `__index__` in [Chapter 12](ch12.html#user_defined_sequences), [“A Slice-Aware __getitem__”](ch12.html#slice_aware_sec). I will not cover `__fspath__`. To learn about it, see [PEP 519—Adding a file system path protocol](https://fpy.li/pep519).

An early realization of the need for distinct string representations for objects appeared in Smalltalk. The 1996 article [“How to Display an Object as a String: printString and displayString”](https://fpy.li/11-13) by Bobby Woolf discusses the implementation of the `printString` and `displayString` methods in that language. From that article, I borrowed the pithy descriptions “the way the developer wants to see it” and “the way the user wants to see it” when defining `repr()` and `str()` in [“Object Representations”](#object_repr_sec).

##### Soapbox

Properties Help Reduce Up-Front Costs

In the initial versions of `Vector2d`, the `x` and `y` attributes were public, as are all Python instance and class attributes by default. Naturally, users of vectors need to access its components. Although our vectors are iterable and can be unpacked into a pair of variables, it’s also desirable to write `my_vector.x` and `my_vector.y` to get each component.

When we felt the need to avoid accidental updates to the `x` and `y` attributes, we implemented properties, but nothing changed elsewhere in the code and in the public interface of `Vector2d`, as verified by the doctests. We are still able to access `my_vector.x` and `my_vector.y`.

This shows that we can always start our classes in the simplest possible way, with public attributes, because when (or if) we later need to impose more control with getters and setters, these can be implemented through properties without changing any of the code that already interacts with our objects through the names (e.g., `x` and `y`) that were initially simple public attributes.

This approach is the opposite of that encouraged by the Java language: a Java programmer cannot start with simple public attributes and only later, if needed, implement properties, because they don’t exist in the language. Therefore, writing getters and setters is the norm in Java—even when those methods do nothing useful—because the API cannot evolve from simple public attributes to getters and setters without breaking all code that uses those attributes.

In addition, as Martelli, Ravenscroft, and Holden point out in [_Python in a Nutshell_, 3rd ed.](https://fpy.li/pynut3), typing getter/setter calls everywhere is goofy. You have to write stuff like:

```
>>>
```

Just to do this:

```
>>>
```

Ward Cunningham, inventor of the wiki and an Extreme Programming pioneer, recommends asking: “What’s the simplest thing that could possibly work?” The idea is to focus on the goal.[^11] Implementing setters and getters up-front is a distraction from the goal. In Python, we can simply use public attributes, knowing we can change them to properties later, if the need arises.

Safety Versus Security in Private Attributes

> Perl doesn’t have an infatuation with enforced privacy. It would prefer that you stayed out of its living room because you weren’t invited, not because it has a shotgun.
> 
> Larry Wall, creator of Perl

Python and Perl are polar opposites in many regards, but Guido and Larry seem to agree on object privacy.

Having taught Python to many Java programmers over the years, I’ve found a lot of them put too much faith in the privacy guarantees that Java offers. As it turns out, the Java `private` and `protected` modifiers normally provide protection against accidents only (i.e., safety). They only offer security against malicious intent if the application is specially configured and deployed on top of a Java [SecurityManager](https://fpy.li/11-15), and that seldom happens in practice, even in security conscious corporate settings.

To prove my point, I like to show this Java class ([Example 11-20](#ex_java_confidential_class)).

##### Example 11-20. Confidential.java: a Java class with a private field named `secret`

```
public
```

In [Example 11-20](#ex_java_confidential_class), I store the `text` in the `secret` field after converting it to uppercase, just to make it obvious that whatever is in that field will be in all caps.

The actual demonstration consists of running _expose.py_ with Jython. That script uses introspection (“reflection” in Java parlance) to get the value of a private field. The code is in [Example 11-21](#ex_expose_py).

##### Example 11-21. expose.py: Jython code to read the content of a private field in another class

```
#!/usr/bin/env jython
```

If you run [Example 11-21](#ex_expose_py), this is what you get:

$ jython expose.py
message.secret `=` TOP SECRET TEXT

The string `'TOP SECRET TEXT'` was read from the `secret` private field of the `Confidential` class.

There is no black magic here: _expose.py_ uses the Java reflection API to get a reference to the private field named `'secret'`, and then calls `'secret_field.setAccessible(True)'` to make it readable. The same thing can be done with Java code, of course (but it takes more than three times as many lines to do it; see the file [_Expose.java_](https://fpy.li/11-16) in the [_Fluent Python_ code repository](https://fpy.li/code)).

The crucial call `.setAccessible(True)` will fail only if the Jython script or the Java main program (e.g., `Expose.class`) is running under the supervision of a [SecurityManager](https://fpy.li/11-15). But in the real world, Java applications are rarely deployed with a SecurityManager—except for Java applets when they were still supported by browsers.

My point is: in Java too, access control modifiers are mostly about safety and not security, at least in practice. So relax and enjoy the power Python gives you. Use it responsibly.

[^1]: 

[^2]:  I used `eval` to clone the object here just to make a point about `repr`; to clone an instance, the `copy.copy` function is safer and faster.

[^3]: .

[^4]: .

[^5]:  by Julien Danjou as a counterargument. Danjou’s post is very good; I do recommend it. But it wasn’t enough to change my mind about `staticmethod`. You’ll have to decide for yourself.

[^6]: .

[^7]: .

[^8]: .

[^9]: .

[^10]: .

[^11]: .