# Vector Class Redux

In order to demonstrate the many methods used to generate object representations, we’ll use a `Vector2d` class similar to the one we saw in [Chapter 1](ch01.html#data_model). We will build on it in this and future sections. [Example 11-1](#ex_vector2d_v0_demo) illustrates the basic behavior we expect from a `Vector2d` instance.

##### Example 11-1. `Vector2d` instances have several representations

```
    
```

[![^1]

The components of a `Vector2d` can be accessed directly as attributes (no getter method calls).

[![^2]

A `Vector2d` can be unpacked to a tuple of variables.

[![^3]

The `repr` of a `Vector2d` emulates the source code for constructing the instance.

[![^4]

Using `eval` here shows that the `repr` of a `Vector2d` is a faithful representation of its constructor call.[^2]

[![^5]

`Vector2d` supports comparison with `==`; this is useful for testing.

[![^6]

`print` calls `str`, which for `Vector2d` produces an ordered pair display.

[![^7]

`bytes` uses the `__bytes__` method to produce a binary representation.

[![^8]

`abs` uses the `__abs__` method to return the magnitude of the `Vector2d`.

[![^9]

`bool` uses the `__bool__` method to return `False` for a `Vector2d` of zero magnitude or `True` otherwise.

`Vector2d` from [Example 11-1](#ex_vector2d_v0_demo) is implemented in _vector2d_v0.py_ ([Example 11-2](#ex_vector2d_v0)). The code is based on [Example 1-2](ch01.html#ex_vector2d), except for the methods for the `+` and `*` operations, which we’ll see later in [Chapter 16](ch16.html#operator_overloading). We’ll add the method for `==` since it’s useful for testing. At this point, `Vector2d` uses several special methods to provide operations that a Pythonista expects in a well-designed object.

##### Example 11-2. vector2d_v0.py: methods so far are all special methods

```
from
```

[![^1]

`typecode` is a class attribute we’ll use when converting `Vector2d` instances to/from `bytes`.

[![^2]

Converting `x` and `y` to `float` in `__init__` catches errors early, which is helpful in case `Vector2d` is called with unsuitable arguments.

[![^3]

`__iter__` makes a `Vector2d` iterable; this is what makes unpacking work (e.g, `x, y = my_vector`). We implement it simply by using a generator expression to yield the components one after the other.[^3]

[![^4]

`__repr__` builds a string by interpolating the components with `{!r}` to get their `repr`; because `Vector2d` is iterable, `*self` feeds the `x` and `y` components to `format`.

[![^5]

From an iterable `Vector2d`, it’s easy to build a `tuple` for display as an ordered pair.

[![^6]

To generate `bytes`, we convert the typecode to `bytes` and concatenate…

[![^7]

…`bytes` converted from an `array` built by iterating over the instance.

[![^8]

To quickly compare all components, build tuples out of the operands. This works for operands that are instances of `Vector2d`, but has issues. See the following warning.

[![^9]

The magnitude is the length of the hypotenuse of the right triangle formed by the `x` and `y` components.

[![^10]

`__bool__` uses `abs(self)` to compute the magnitude, then converts it to `bool`, so `0.0` becomes `False`, nonzero is `True`.

###### Warning

Method `__eq__` in [Example 11-2](#ex_vector2d_v0) works for `Vector2d` operands but also returns `True` when comparing `Vector2d` instances to other iterables holding the same numeric values (e.g., `Vector(3, 4) == [3, 4]`). This may be considered a feature or a bug. Further discussion needs to wait until [Chapter 16](ch16.html#operator_overloading), when we cover operator overloading.

We have a fairly complete set of basic methods, but we still need a way to rebuild a `Vector2d` from the binary representation produced by `bytes()`.