# classmethod Versus staticmethod

The `classmethod` decorator is not mentioned in the Python tutorial, and neither is `staticmethod`. Anyone who has learned OO in Java may wonder why Python has both of these decorators and not just one of them.

Let’s start with `classmethod`. [Example 11-3](#ex_vector2d_v1) shows its use: to define a method that operates on the class and not on instances. `classmethod` changes the way the method is called, so it receives the class itself as the first argument, instead of an instance. Its most common use is for alternative constructors, like `frombytes` in [Example 11-3](#ex_vector2d_v1). Note how the last line of `frombytes` actually uses the `cls` argument by invoking it to build a new instance: `cls(*memv)`.

In contrast, the `staticmethod` decorator changes a method so that it receives no special first argument. In essence, a static method is just like a plain function that happens to live in a class body, instead of being defined at the module level. [Example 11-4](#ex_class_staticmethod) contrasts the operation of `classmethod` and `staticmethod`.

##### Example 11-4. Comparing behaviors of `classmethod` and `staticmethod`

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`klassmeth` just returns all positional arguments.

[![^2]

`statmeth` does the same.

[![^3]

No matter how you invoke it, `Demo.klassmeth` receives the `Demo` class as the first argument.

[![^4]

`Demo.statmeth` behaves just like a plain old function.

###### Note

The `classmethod` decorator is clearly useful, but good use cases for `staticmethod` are very rare in my experience. Maybe the function is closely related even if it never touches the class, so you may want to place it nearby in the code. Even then, defining the function right before or after the class in the same module is close enough most of the time.[^5]

Now that we’ve seen what `classmethod` is good for (and that `staticmethod` is not very useful), let’s go back to the issue of object representation and see how to support formatted output.