## Supervisors Side-by-Side

The line count of _spinner_thread.py_ and _spinner_async.py_ is nearly the same. The `supervisor` functions are the heart of these examples. Let’s compare them in detail. [Example 19-8](#thread_supervisor_ex) lists only the `supervisor` from [Example 19-2](#spinner_thread_rest_ex).

##### Example 19-8. spinner_thread.py: the threaded `supervisor` function

```
def
```

For comparison, [Example 19-9](#asyncio_supervisor_ex) shows the `supervisor` coroutine from [Example 19-4](#spinner_async_start_ex).

##### Example 19-9. spinner_async.py: the asynchronous `supervisor` coroutine

```
async
```

Here is a summary of the differences and similarities to note between the two `supervisor` implementations:

- An `asyncio.Task` is roughly the equivalent of a `threading.Thread`.
    
- A `Task` drives a coroutine object, and a `Thread` invokes a callable.
    
- A coroutine yields control explicitly with the `await` keyword.
    
- You don’t instantiate `Task` objects yourself, you get them by passing a coroutine to `asyncio.create_task(…)`.
    
- When `asyncio.create_task(…)` returns a `Task` object, it is already scheduled to run, but a `Thread` instance must be explicitly told to run by calling its `start` method.
    
- In the threaded `supervisor`, `slow` is a plain function and is directly invoked by the main thread. In the asynchronous `supervisor`, `slow` is a coroutine driven by `await`.
    
- There’s no API to terminate a thread from the outside; instead, you must send a signal—like setting the `done` `Event` object. For tasks, there is the `Task.cancel()` instance method, which raises `CancelledError` at the `await` expression where the coroutine body is currently suspended.
    
- The `supervisor` coroutine must be started with `asyncio.run` in the `main` function.
    

This comparison should help you understand how concurrent jobs are orchestrated with _asyncio_, in contrast to how it’s done with the `Threading` module, which may be more familiar to you.

One final point related to threads versus coroutines: if you’ve done any nontrivial programming with threads, you know how challenging it is to reason about the program because the scheduler can interrupt a thread at any time. You must remember to hold locks to protect the critical sections of your program, to avoid getting interrupted in the middle of a multistep operation—which could leave data in an invalid state.

With coroutines, your code is protected against interruption by default. You must explicitly `await` to let the rest of the program run. Instead of holding locks to synchronize the operations of multiple threads, coroutines are “synchronized” by definition: only one of them is running at any time. When you want to give up control, you use `await` to yield control back to the scheduler. That’s why it is possible to safely cancel a coroutine: by definition, a coroutine can only be cancelled when it’s suspended at an `await` expression, so you can perform cleanup by handling the `CancelledError` exception.

The `time.sleep()` call blocks but does nothing. Now we’ll experiment with a CPU-intensive call to get a better understanding of the GIL, as well as the effect of CPU-intensive functions in asynchronous code.