## Spinner with Processes

The `multiprocessing` package supports running concurrent tasks in separate Python processes instead of threads. When you create a `multiprocessing.Process` instance, a whole new Python interpreter is started as a child process in the background. Since each Python process has its own GIL, this allows your program to use all available CPU cores—but that ultimately depends on the operating system scheduler. We’ll see practical effects in [“A Homegrown Process Pool”](#naive_multiprocessing_sec), but for this simple program it makes no real difference.

The point of this section is to introduce `multiprocessing` and show that its API emulates the `threading` API, making it easy to convert simple programs from threads to processes, as shown in _spinner_proc.py_ ([Example 19-3](#spinner_proc_ex)).

##### Example 19-3. spinner_proc.py: only the changed parts are shown; everything else is the same as spinner_thread.py

```
import
```

[![^1]

The basic `multiprocessing` API imitates the `threading` API, but type hints and Mypy expose this difference: `multiprocessing.Event` is a function (not a class like `threading.Event`) which returns a `synchronize.Event` instance…

[![^2]

…forcing us to import `multiprocessing.synchronize`…

[![^3]

…to write this type hint.

[![^4]

Basic usage of the `Process` class is similar to `Thread`.

[![^5]

The `spinner` object is displayed as `<Process name='Process-1' parent=14868 initial>`, where `14868` is the process ID of the Python instance running _spinner_proc.py_.

The basic API of `threading` and `multiprocessing` are similar, but their implementation is very different, and `multiprocessing` has a much larger API to handle the added complexity of multiprocess programming. For example, one challenge when converting from threads to processes is how to communicate between processes that are isolated by the operating system and can’t share Python objects. This means that objects crossing process boundaries have to be serialized and deserialized, which creates overhead. In [Example 19-3](#spinner_proc_ex), the only data that crosses the process boundary is the `Event` state, which is implemented with a low-level OS semaphore in the C code underlying the `multiprocessing` module.[^10]

###### Tip

Since Python 3.8, there’s a [`multiprocessing.shared_memory`](https://fpy.li/19-12) package in the standard library, but it does not support instances of user-defined classes. Besides raw bytes, the package allows processes to share a `ShareableList`, a mutable sequence type that can hold a fixed number of items of types `int`, `float`, `bool`, and `None`, as well as `str` and `bytes` up to 10 MB per item. See the [`ShareableList`](https://fpy.li/19-13) documentation for more.

Now let’s see how the same behavior can be achieved with coroutines instead of threads or processes.