## NumPy

Throughout this book, I make a point of highlighting what is already in the Python standard library so you can make the most of it. But NumPy is so awesome that a detour is warranted.

For advanced array and matrix operations, NumPy is the reason why Python became mainstream in scientific computing applications. NumPy implements multi-dimensional, homogeneous arrays and matrix types that hold not only numbers but also user-defined records, and provides efficient element-wise operations.

SciPy is a library, written on top of NumPy, offering many scientific computing algorithms from linear algebra, numerical calculus, and statistics. SciPy is fast and reliable because it leverages the widely used C and Fortran codebase from the [Netlib Repository](https://fpy.li/2-19). In other words, SciPy gives scientists the best of both worlds: an interactive prompt and high-level Python APIs, together with industrial-strength number-crunching functions optimized in C and Fortran.

As a very brief NumPy demo, [Example 2-22](#ex_numpy_array) shows some basic operations with two-dimensional arrays.

##### Example 2-22. Basic operations with rows and columns in a `numpy.ndarray`

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Import NumPy, after installing (it’s not in the Python standard library). Conventionally, `numpy` is imported as `np`.

[![^2]

Build and inspect a `numpy.ndarray` with integers `0` to `11`.

[![^3]

Inspect the dimensions of the array: this is a one-dimensional, 12-element array.

[![^4]

Change the shape of the array, adding one dimension, then inspecting the result.

[![^5]

Get row at index `2`.

[![^6]

Get element at index `2, 1`.

[![^7]

Get column at index `1`.

[![^8]

Create a new array by transposing (swapping columns with rows).

NumPy also supports high-level operations for loading, saving, and operating on all elements of a `numpy.ndarray`:

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Load 10 million floating-point numbers from a text file.

[![^2]

Use sequence slicing notation to inspect the last three numbers.

[![^3]

Multiply every element in the `floats` array by `.5` and inspect the last three elements again.

[![^4]

Import the high-resolution performance measurement timer (available since Python 3.3).

[![^5]

Divide every element by `3`; the elapsed time for 10 million floats is less than 40 milliseconds.

[![^6]

Save the array in a _.npy_ binary file.

[![^7]

Load the data as a memory-mapped file into another array; this allows efficient processing of slices of the array even if it does not fit entirely in memory.

[![^8]

Inspect the last three elements after multiplying every element by `6`.

This was just an appetizer.

NumPy and SciPy are formidable libraries, and are the foundation of other awesome tools such as the [Pandas](https://fpy.li/2-20)—which implements efficient array types that can hold nonnumeric data and provides import/export functions for many different formats, like _.csv_, _.xls_, SQL dumps, HDF5, etc.—and [scikit-learn](https://fpy.li/2-21), currently the most widely used Machine Learning toolset. Most NumPy and SciPy functions are implemented in C or C++, and can leverage all CPU cores because they release Python’s GIL (Global Interpreter Lock). The [Dask](https://fpy.li/dask) project supports parallelizing NumPy, Pandas, and scikit-learn processing across clusters of machines. These packages deserve entire books about them. This is not one of those books. But no overview of Python sequences would be complete without at least a quick look at NumPy arrays.

Having looked at flat sequences—standard arrays and NumPy arrays—we now turn to a completely different set of replacements for the plain old `list`: queues.