# Vector: A User-Defined Sequence Type

Our strategy to implement `Vector` will be to use composition, not inheritance. We’ll store the components in an `array` of floats, and will implement the methods needed for our `Vector` to behave like an immutable flat sequence.

But before we implement the sequence methods, let’s make sure we have a baseline implementation of `Vector` that is compatible with our earlier `Vector2d` class—except where such compatibility would not make sense.

##### Vector Applications Beyond Three Dimensions

Who needs a vector with 1,000 dimensions? N-dimensional vectors (with large values of N) are widely used in information retrieval, where documents and text queries are represented as vectors, with one dimension per word. This is called the [Vector space model](https://fpy.li/12-1). In this model, a key relevance metric is the cosine similarity (i.e., the cosine of the angle between the vector representing the query and the vector representing the document). As the angle decreases, the cosine approaches the maximum value of 1, and so does the relevance of the document to the query.

Having said that, the `Vector` class in this chapter is a didactic example and we’ll not do much math here. Our goal is just to demonstrate some Python special methods in the context of a sequence type.

NumPy and SciPy are the tools you need for real-world vector math. The PyPI package [gensim](https://fpy.li/12-2), by Radim Řehůřek, implements vector space modeling for natural language processing and information retrieval, using NumPy and SciPy.