# Protocols and Duck Typing

As early as [Chapter 1](ch01.html#data_model), we saw that you don’t need to inherit from any special class to create a fully functional sequence type in Python; you just need to implement the methods that fulfill the sequence protocol. But what kind of protocol are we talking about?

In the context of object-oriented programming, a protocol is an informal interface, defined only in documentation and not in code. For example, the sequence protocol in Python entails just the `__len__` and `__getitem__` methods. Any class `Spam` that implements those methods with the standard signature and semantics can be used anywhere a sequence is expected. Whether `Spam` is a subclass of this or that is irrelevant; all that matters is that it provides the necessary methods. We saw that in [Example 1-1](ch01.html#ex_pythonic_deck), reproduced here in [Example 12-3](#ex_pythonic_deck_rep).

##### Example 12-3. Code from [Example 1-1](ch01.html#ex_pythonic_deck), reproduced here for convenience

```
import
```

The `FrenchDeck` class in [Example 12-3](#ex_pythonic_deck_rep) takes advantage of many Python facilities because it implements the sequence protocol, even if that is not declared anywhere in the code. An experienced Python coder will look at it and understand that it _is_ a sequence, even if it subclasses `object`. We say it _is_ a sequence because it _behaves_ like one, and that is what matters.

This became known as _duck typing_, after Alex Martelli’s post quoted at the beginning of this chapter.

Because protocols are informal and unenforced, you can often get away with implementing just part of a protocol, if you know the specific context where a class will be used. For example, to support iteration, only `__getitem__` is required; there is no need to provide `__len__`.

###### Tip

With [PEP 544—Protocols: Structural subtyping (static duck typing)](https://fpy.li/pep544), Python 3.8 supports _protocol classes_: `typing` constructs, which we studied in [“Static Protocols”](ch08.html#protocols_in_fn). This new use of the word protocol in Python has a related but different meaning. When I need to differentiate them, I write _static protocol_ to refer to the protocols formalized in protocol classes, and _dynamic protocol_ for the traditional sense. One key difference is that static protocol implementations must provide all methods defined in the protocol class. [“Two Kinds of Protocols”](ch13.html#two_kinds_protocols_sec) in [Chapter 13](ch13.html#ifaces_prot_abc) has more details.

We’ll now implement the sequence protocol in `Vector`, initially without proper support for slicing, but later adding that.