# Vector Take #3: Dynamic Attribute Access

In the evolution from `Vector2d` to `Vector`, we lost the ability to access vector components by name (e.g., `v.x`, `v.y`). We are now dealing with vectors that may have a large number of components. Still, it may be convenient to access the first few components with shortcut letters such as `x`, `y`, `z` instead of `v[0]`, `v[1]`, and `v[2]`.

Here is the alternative syntax we want to provide for reading the first four components of a vector:

```
>>> 
```

In `Vector2d`, we provided read-only access to `x` and `y` using the `@property` decorator ([Example 11-7](ch11.html#ex_vector2d_v3)). We could write four properties in `Vector`, but it would be tedious. The `__getattr__` special method provides a better way.

The `__getattr__` method is invoked by the interpreter when attribute lookup fails. In simple terms, given the expression `my_obj.x`, Python checks if the `my_obj` instance has an attribute named `x`; if not, the search goes to the class (`my_obj.__class__`), and then up the inheritance graph.[^2].

[Example 12-8](#ex_vector_v3_getattr) lists our `__getattr__` method. Essentially it checks whether the attribute being sought is one of the letters `xyzt` and if so, returns the corresponding vector component.

##### Example 12-8. Part of _vector_v3.py_: `__getattr__` method added to the `Vector` class

```
    
```

[![^1]

Set `__match_args__` to allow positional pattern matching on the dynamic attributes supported by `__getattr__`.[^3]

[![^2]

Get the `Vector` class for later use.

[![^3]

Try to get the position of `name` in `__match_args__`.

[![^4]

`.index(name)` raises `ValueError` when `name` is not found; set `pos` to `-1`. (I’d rather use a method like `str.find` here, but `tuple` doesn’t implement it.)

[![^5]

If the `pos` is within range of the available components, return the component.

[![^6]

If we get this far, raise `AttributeError` with a standard message text.

It’s not hard to implement `__getattr__`, but in this case it’s not enough. Consider the bizarre interaction in [Example 12-9](#ex_vector_v3_getattr_bug).

##### Example 12-9. Inappropriate behavior: assigning to `v.x` raises no error, but introduces an inconsistency

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Access element `v[0]` as `v.x`.

[![^2]

Assign new value to `v.x`. This should raise an exception.

[![^3]

Reading `v.x` shows the new value, `10`.

[![^4]

However, the vector components did not change.

Can you explain what is happening? In particular, why does `v.x` return `10` the second time if that value is not in the vector components array? If you don’t know right off the bat, study the explanation of `__getattr__` given right before [Example 12-8](#ex_vector_v3_getattr). It’s a bit subtle, but a very important foundation to understand a lot of what comes later in the book.

After you’ve given it some thought, proceed and we’ll explain exactly what happened.

The inconsistency in [Example 12-9](#ex_vector_v3_getattr_bug) was introduced because of the way `__getattr__` works: Python only calls that method as a fallback, when the object does not have the named attribute. However, after we assign `v.x = 10`, the `v` object now has an `x` attribute, so `__getattr__` will no longer be called to retrieve `v.x`: the interpreter will just return the value `10` that is bound to `v.x`. On the other hand, our implementation of `__getattr__` pays no attention to instance attributes other than `self._components`, from where it retrieves the values of the “virtual attributes” listed in `__match_args__`.

We need to customize the logic for setting attributes in our `Vector` class in order to avoid this inconsistency.

Recall that in the latest `Vector2d` examples from [Chapter 11](ch11.html#pythonic_objects), trying to assign to the `.x` or `.y` instance attributes raised `AttributeError`. In `Vector`, we want the same exception with any attempt at assigning to all single-letter lowercase attribute names, just to avoid confusion. To do that, we’ll implement `__setattr__`, as listed in [Example 12-10](#ex_vector_v3_setattr).

##### Example 12-10. Part of vector_v3.py: `__setattr__` method in the `Vector` class

```
    
```

[![^1]

Special handling for single-character attribute names.

[![^2]

If `name` is one of `__match_args__`, set specific error message.

[![^3]

If `name` is lowercase, set error message about all single-letter names.

[![^4]

Otherwise, set blank error message.

[![^5]

If there is a nonblank error message, raise `AttributeError`.

[![^6]

Default case: call `__setattr__` on superclass for standard behavior.

###### Tip

The `super()` function provides a way to access methods of superclasses dynamically, a necessity in a dynamic language supporting multiple inheritance like Python. It’s used to delegate some task from a method in a subclass to a suitable method in a superclass, as seen in [Example 12-10](#ex_vector_v3_setattr). There is more about `super` in [“Multiple Inheritance and Method Resolution Order”](ch14.html#mro_section).

While choosing the error message to display with `AttributeError`, my first check was the behavior of the built-in `complex` type, because they are immutable and have a pair of data attributes, `real` and `imag`. Trying to change either of those in a `complex` instance raises `AttributeError` with the message `"can't set attribute"`. On the other hand, trying to set a read-only attribute protected by a property as we did in [“A Hashable Vector2d”](ch11.html#hashable_vector2d) produces the message `"read-only attribute"`. I drew inspiration from both wordings to set the `error` string in `__setitem__`, but was more explicit about the forbidden attributes.

Note that we are not disallowing setting all attributes, only single-letter, lowercase ones, to avoid confusion with the supported read-only attributes `x`, `y`, `z`, and `t`.

###### Warning

Knowing that declaring `__slots__` at the class level prevents setting new instance attributes, it’s tempting to use that feature instead of implementing `__setattr__` as we did. However, because of all the caveats discussed in [“Summarizing the Issues with __slots__”](ch11.html#problems_with_slots), using `__slots__` just to prevent instance attribute creation is not recommended. `__slots__` should be used only to save memory, and only if that is a real issue.

Even without supporting writing to the `Vector` components, here is an important takeaway from this example: very often when you implement `__getattr__`, you need to code `__setattr__` as well, to avoid inconsistent behavior in your objects.

If we wanted to allow changing components, we could implement `__setitem__` to enable `v[0] = 1.1` and/or `__setattr__` to make `v.x = 1.1` work. But `Vector` will remain immutable because we want to make it hashable in the coming section.