# Chapter Summary

The `Vector` example in this chapter was designed to be compatible with `Vector2d`, except for the use of a different constructor signature accepting a single iterable argument, just like the built-in sequence types do. The fact that `Vector` behaves as a sequence just by implementing `__getitem__` and `__len__` prompted a discussion of protocols, the informal interfaces used in duck-typed languages.

We then looked at how the `my_seq[a:b:c]` syntax works behind the scenes, by creating a `slice(a, b, c)` object and handing it to `__getitem__`. Armed with this knowledge, we made `Vector` respond correctly to slicing, by returning new `Vector` instances, just like a Pythonic sequence is expected to do.

The next step was to provide read-only access to the first few `Vector` components using notation such as `my_vec.x`. We did it by implementing `__getattr__`. Doing that opened the possibility of tempting the user to assign to those special components by writing `my_vec.x = 7`, revealing a potential bug. We fixed it by implementing `__setattr__` as well, to forbid assigning values to single-letter attributes. Very often, when you code a `__getattr__` you need to add `__setattr__` too, in order to avoid inconsistent behavior.

Implementing the `__hash__` function provided the perfect context for using `functools.reduce`, because we needed to apply the xor operator `^` in succession to the hashes of all `Vector` components to produce an aggregate hash code for the whole `Vector`. After applying `reduce` in `__hash__`, we used the `all` reducing built-in to create a more efficient `__eq__` method.

The last enhancement to `Vector` was to reimplement the `__format__` method from `Vector2d` by supporting spherical coordinates as an alternative to the default Cartesian coordinates. We used quite a bit of math and several generators to code `__format__` and its auxiliary functions, but these are implementation details—and we’ll come back to the generators in [Chapter 17](ch17.html#iterables2generators). The goal of that last section was to support a custom format, thus fulfilling the promise of a `Vector` that could do everything a `Vector2d` did, and more.

As we did in [Chapter 11](ch11.html#pythonic_objects), here we often looked at how standard Python objects behave, to emulate them and provide a “Pythonic” look-and-feel to `Vector`.

In [Chapter 16](ch16.html#operator_overloading), we will implement several infix operators on `Vector`. The math will be much simpler than in the `angle()` method here, but exploring how infix operators work in Python is a great lesson in OO design. But before we get to operator overloading, we’ll step back from working on one class and look at organizing multiple classes with interfaces and inheritance, the subjects of Chapters [^13].