# Further Reading

The official documentation for the attribute handling and introspection built-in functions is [Chapter 2, “Built-in Functions”](https://fpy.li/22-22) of _The Python Standard Library_. The related special methods and the `__slots__` special attribute are documented in _The Python Language Reference_ in [“3.3.2. Customizing attribute access”](https://fpy.li/22-23). The semantics of how special methods are invoked bypassing instances is explained in [“3.3.9. Special method lookup”](https://fpy.li/22-24). In Chapter 4, “Built-in Types,” of _The Python Standard Library_, [“4.13. Special Attributes”](https://fpy.li/22-25) covers `__class__` and `__dict__` attributes.

_[Python Cookbook](https://fpy.li/pycook3)_, 3rd ed., by David Beazley and Brian K. Jones (O’Reilly) has several recipes covering the topics of this chapter, but I will highlight three that are outstanding: “Recipe 8.8. Extending a Property in a Subclass” addresses the thorny issue of overriding the methods inside a property inherited from a superclass; “Recipe 8.15. Delegating Attribute Access” implements a proxy class showcasing most special methods from [“Special Methods for Attribute Handling”](#special_methods_for_attr_sec) in this book; and the awesome “Recipe 9.21. Avoiding Repetitive Property Methods,” which was the basis for the property factory function presented in [Example 22-28](#lineitem_class_v2prop).

_[Python in a Nutshell,](https://fpy.li/pynut3)_ 3rd ed., by Alex Martelli, Anna Ravenscroft, and Steve Holden (O’Reilly) is rigorous and objective. They devote only three pages to properties, but that’s because the book follows an axiomatic presentation style: the preceding 15 pages or so provide a thorough description of the semantics of Python classes from the ground up, including descriptors, which are how properties are actually implemented under the hood. So by the time Martelli et al., get to properties, they pack a lot of insights in those three pages—including what I selected to open this chapter.

Bertrand Meyer—quoted in the Uniform Access Principle definition in this chapter opening—pioneered the Design by Contract methodology, designed the Eiffel language, and wrote the excellent _Object-Oriented Software Construction_, 2nd ed. (Pearson). The first six chapters provide one of the best conceptual introductions to OO analysis and design I’ve seen. Chapter 11 presents Design by Contract, and Chapter 35 offers Meyer’s assessments of some influential object-oriented languages: Simula, Smalltalk, CLOS (the Common Lisp Object System), Objective-C, C++, and Java, with brief comments on some others. Only in the last page of the book does he reveal that the highly readable “notation” he uses as pseudocode is Eiffel.

##### Soapbox

Meyer’s Uniform Access Principle is aesthetically appealing. As a programmer using an API, I shouldn’t have to care whether `product.price` simply fetches a data attribute or performs a computation. As a consumer and a citizen, I do care: in e-commerce today the value of `product.price` often depends on who is asking, so it’s certainly not a mere data attribute. In fact, it’s common practice that the price is lower if the query comes from outside the store—say, from a price-comparison engine. This effectively punishes loyal customers who like to browse within a particular store. But I digress.

The previous digression does raise a relevant point for programming: although the Uniform Access Principle makes perfect sense in an ideal world, in reality, users of an API may need to know whether reading `product.price` is potentially too expensive or time-consuming. That’s a problem with programming abstractions in general: they make it hard to reason about the runtime cost of evaluating an expression. On the other hand, abstractions let users accomplish more with less code. It’s a trade-off. As usual in matters of software engineering, Ward Cunningham’s [original wiki](https://fpy.li/22-26) hosts insightful arguments about the merits of the [Uniform Access Principle](https://fpy.li/22-27).

In object-oriented programming languages, application or violations of the Uniform Access Principle often revolve around the syntax of reading public data attributes versus invoking getter/setter methods.

Smalltalk and Ruby address this issue in a simple and elegant way: they don’t support public data attributes at all. Every instance attribute in these languages is private, so every access to them must be through methods. But their syntax makes this painless: in Ruby, `product.price` invokes the `price` getter; in Smalltalk, it’s simply `product price`.

At the other end of the spectrum, the Java language allows the programmer to choose among four access-level modifiers—including the no-name default that the [Java Tutorial](https://fpy.li/22-28) calls “package-private.”

The general practice does not agree with the syntax established by the Java designers, though. Everybody in Java-land agrees that attributes should be `private`, and you must spell it out every time, because it’s not the default. When all attributes are private, all access to them from outside the class must go through accessors. Java IDEs include shortcuts for generating accessor methods automatically. Unfortunately, the IDE is not so helpful when you must read the code six months later. It’s up to you to wade through a sea of do-nothing accessors to find those that add value by implementing some business logic.

Alex Martelli speaks for the majority of the Python community when he calls accessors “goofy idioms” and then provides these examples that look very different but do the same thing:[^14]

```
someInstance
```

Sometimes when designing APIs, I’ve wondered whether every method that does not take an argument (besides `self`), returns a value (other than `None`), and is a pure function (i.e., has no side effects) should be replaced by a read-only property. In this chapter, the `LineItem.subtotal` method (as in [Example 22-27](#lineitem_class_v2prop_class)) would be a good candidate to become a read-only property. Of course, this excludes methods that are designed to change the object, such as `my_list.clear()`. It would be a terrible idea to turn that into a property, so that merely accessing `my_list.clear` would delete the contents of the list!

In the [_Pingo_](https://fpy.li/22-29) GPIO library, which I coauthored (mentioned in [“The __missing__ Method”](ch03.html#missing_method)), much of the user-level API is based on properties. For example, to read the current value of an analog pin, the user writes `pin.value`, and setting a digital pin mode is written as `pin.mode = OUT`. Behind the scenes, reading an analog pin value or setting a digital pin mode may involve a lot of code, depending on the specific board driver. We decided to use properties in Pingo because we want the API to be comfortable to use even in interactive environments like a Jupyter Notebook, and we feel `pin.mode = OUT` is easier on the eyes and on the fingers than `pin.set_mode(OUT)`.

Although I find the Smalltalk and Ruby solution cleaner, I think the Python approach makes more sense than the Java one. We are allowed to start simple, coding data members as public attributes, because we know they can always be wrapped by properties (or descriptors, which we’ll talk about in the next chapter).

__new__ Is Better than new

Another example of the Uniform Access Principle (or a variation of it) is the fact that function calls and object instantiation use the same syntax in Python: `my_obj = foo()`, where `foo` may be a class or any other callable.

Other languages influenced by C++ syntax have a `new` operator that makes instantiation look different than a call. Most of the time, the user of an API doesn’t care whether `foo` is a function or a class. For years I was under the impression that `property` was a function. In normal usage, it makes no difference.

There are many good reasons for replacing constructors with factories.[^15]. A related use is caching expensive object construction. Also, sometimes it’s convenient to return objects of different types, depending on the arguments given.

Coding a constructor is simpler; providing a factory adds flexibility at the expense of more code. In languages that have a `new` operator, the designer of an API must decide in advance whether to stick with a simple constructor or invest in a factory. If the initial choice is wrong, the correction may be costly—all because `new` is an operator.

Sometimes it may also be convenient to go the other way, and replace a simple function with a class.

In Python, classes and functions are interchangeable in many situations. Not only because there’s no `new` operator, but also because there is the `__new__` special method, which can turn a class into a factory producing objects of different kinds (as we saw in [“Flexible Object Creation with __new__”](#flexible_new_sec)) or returning prebuilt instances instead of creating a new one every time.

This function-class duality would be easier to leverage if [PEP 8 — Style Guide for Python Code](https://fpy.li/22-31) did not recommend `CamelCase` for class names. On the other hand, dozens of classes in the standard library have lowercase names (e.g., `property`, `str`, `defaultdict`, etc.). So maybe the use of lowercase class names is a feature, and not a bug. But however we look at it, the inconsistent capitalization of classes in the Python standard library poses a usability problem.

Although calling a function is not different from calling a class, it’s good to know which is which because of another thing we can do with a class: subclassing. So I personally use `CamelCase` in every class that I code, and I wish all classes in the Python standard library used the same convention. I am looking at you, `collections.OrderedDict` and `collections.defaultdict`.

[^1]: , p. 123.

[^2]: , p. 57.

[^3]: .

[^4]: .

[^5]:  The expression `self.__data[name]` is where a `KeyError` exception may occur. Ideally, it should be handled and an `AttributeError` raised instead, because that’s what is expected from `__getattr__`. The diligent reader is invited to code the error handling as an exercise.

[^6]:  The source of the data is JSON, and the only collection types in JSON data are `dict` and `list`.

[^7]: .

[^8]:  if you’re interested in this discussion.

[^9]: .

[^10]: . Note that as of 2021, you need a subscription to read the article.

[^11]: .

[^12]:  as I review this in October 2021.

[^13]:  Alex Martelli points out that, although `__slots__` can be coded as a `list`, it’s better to be explicit and always use a `tuple`, because changing the list in the `__slots__` after the class body is processed has no effect, so it would be misleading to use a mutable sequence there.

[^14]: , p. 101.

[^15]: .