### Variance in Callable types

Imagine a temperature control system with a simple `update` function as shown in [Example 8-24](#callable_variance_ex). The `update` function calls the `probe` function to get the current temperature, and calls `display` to show the temperature to the user. Both `probe` and `display` are passed as arguments to `update` for didactic reasons. The goal of the example is to contrast two `Callable` annotations: one with a return type, the other with a parameter type.

##### Example 8-24. Illustrating variance.

`from` `collections.abc` `import` `Callable`
`def` `update``(`  [![^1]
        `probe``:` `Callable``[``[``]``,` `float``]``,`  [![^2]
        `display``:` `Callable``[``[``float``]``,` `None``]`  [![^3]
    `)` `-``>` `None``:`
    `temperature` `=` `probe``(``)`
    `# imagine lots of control code here`
    `display``(``temperature``)`
`def` `probe_ok``(``)` `-``>` `int``:`  [![^4]
    `return` `42`
`def` `display_wrong``(``temperature``:` `int``)` `-``>` `None``:`  [![^5]
    `print``(``hex``(``temperature``)``)`
`update``(``probe_ok``,` `display_wrong``)`  `# type error`  [![^6]
`def` `display_ok``(``temperature``:` `complex``)` `-``>` `None``:`  [![^7]
    `print``(``temperature``)`
`update``(``probe_ok``,` `display_ok``)`  `# OK`  [![^8]

[![^1]

`update` takes two callables as arguments.

[![^2]

`probe` must be a callable that takes no arguments and returns a `float`.

[![^3]

`display` takes a `float` argument and returns `None`.

[![^4]

`probe_ok` is _consistent-with_ `Callable[[], float]` because returning an `int` does not break code that expects a `float`.

[![^5]

`display_wrong` is not _consistent-with_ `Callable[[float], None]` because there’s no guarantee that a function that expects an `int` can handle a `float`; for example, Python’s `hex` function accepts an `int` but rejects a `float`.

[![^6]

Mypy flags this line because `display_wrong` is incompatible with the type hint in the `display` parameter of `update`.

[![^7]

`display_ok` is _consistent-with_ `Callable[[float], None]` because a function that accepts a `complex` can also handle a `float` argument.

[![^8]

Mypy is happy with this line.

To summarize, it’s OK to provide a callback that returns an `int` when the code expects a callback that returns a `float`, because an `int` value can always be used where a `float` is expected.

Formally, we say that `Callable[[], int]` is _subtype-of_ `Callable[[], float]`—as `int` is _subtype-of_ `float`. This means that `Callable` is _covariant_ on the return type because the _subtype-of_ relationship of the types `int` and `float` is in the same direction as the relationship of the `Callable` types that use them as return types.

On the other hand, it’s a type error to provide a callback that takes a `int` argument when a callback that handles a `float` is required.

Formally, `Callable[[int], None]` is not a _subtype-of_ `Callable[[float], None]`. Although `int` is _subtype-of_ `float`, in the parameterized `Callable` type the relationship is reversed: `Callable[[float], None]` is _subtype-of_ `Callable[[int], None]`. Therefore we say that `Callable` is _contravariant_ on the declared parameter types.

[“Variance”](ch15.html#variance_sec) in [Chapter 15](ch15.html#more_types_ch) explains variance with more details and examples of invariant, covariant, and contravariant types.

###### Tip

For now, rest assured that most parameterized generic types are _invariant_, therefore simpler. For example, if I declare `scores: list[float]`, that tells me exactly what I can assign to `scores`. I can’t assign objects declared as `list[int]` or `list[complex]`:

- A `list[int]` object is not acceptable because it cannot hold `float` values which my code may need to put into `scores`.
    
- A `list[complex]` object is not acceptable because my code may need to sort `scores` to find the median, but `complex` does not provide `__lt__`, therefore `list[complex]` is not sortable.
    

Now we get to the last special type we’ll cover in this chapter.