## A Contravariant Trash Can

Now we’ll model the cafeteria rule for deploying a trash can. Let’s assume food and drinks are served in biodegradable packages, and leftovers as well as single-use utensils are also biodegradable. The trash cans must be suitable for biodegradable refuse.

###### Note

For the sake of this didactic example, let’s make simplifying assumptions to classify trash in a neat hierarchy:

- `Refuse` is the most general type of trash. All trash is refuse.
    
- `Biodegradable` is a specific type of trash that can be decomposed by organisms over time. Some `Refuse` is not `Biodegradable`.
    
- `Compostable` is a specific type of `Biodegradable` trash that can be efficiently turned into organic fertilizer in a compost bin or in a composting facility. Not all `Biodegradable` trash is `Compostable` in our definition.
    

In order to model the rule for an acceptable trash can in the cafeteria, we need to introduce the concept of “contravariance” through an example using it, as shown in [Example 15-20](#contravariant_trash_ex).

##### Example 15-20. _contravariant.py_: type definitions and `install` function

```
from
```

[![^1]

A type hierarchy for refuse: `Refuse` is the most general type, `Compostable` is the most specific.

[![^2]

`T_contra` is a conventional name for a contravariant type variable.

[![^3]

`TrashCan` is contravariant on the type of refuse.

Given those definitions, these types of trash cans are acceptable:

```
bio_can
```

The more general `TrashCan[Refuse]` is acceptable because it can take any kind of refuse, including `Biodegradable`. However, a `TrashCan[Compostable]` will not do, because it cannot take `Biodegradable`:

```
compost_can
```

Let’s summarize the concepts we just saw.