## LineItem Take #4: Automatic Naming of Storage Attributes

To avoid retyping the attribute name in the descriptor instances, we’ll implement `__set_name__` to set the `storage_name` of each `Quantity` instance. The `__set_name__` special method was added to the descriptor protocol in Python 3.6. The interpreter calls `__set_name__` on each descriptor it finds in a `class` body—if the descriptor implements it.[^4]

In [Example 23-3](#lineitem_class_v4), the `LineItem` descriptor class doesn’t need an `__init__`. Instead, `__set_item__` saves the name of the storage attribute.

##### Example 23-3. bulkfood_v4.py: `__set_name__` sets the name for each `Quantity` descriptor instance

```
class
```

[![^1]

`self` is the descriptor instance (not the managed instance), `owner` is the managed class, and `name` is the name of the attribute of `owner` to which this descriptor instance was assigned in the class body of `owner`.

[![^2]

This is what the `__init__` did in [Example 23-1](#quantity_v3).

[![^3]

The `__set__` method here is exactly the same as in [Example 23-1](#quantity_v3).

[![^4]

Implementing `__get__` is not necessary because the name of the storage attribute matches the name of the managed attribute. The expression `product.price` gets the `price` attribute directly from the `LineItem` instance.

[![^5]

Now we don’t need to pass the managed attribute name to the `Quantity` constructor. That was the goal for this version.

Looking at [Example 23-3](#lineitem_class_v4), you may think that’s a lot of code just for managing a couple of attributes, but it’s important to realize that the descriptor logic is now abstracted into a separate code unit: the `Quantity` class. Usually we do not define a descriptor in the same module where it’s used, but in a separate utility module designed to be used across the application—even in many applications, if you are developing a library or framework.

With this in mind, [Example 23-4](#lineitem_class_v4c) better represents the typical usage of a descriptor.

##### Example 23-4. bulkfood_v4c.py: `LineItem` definition uncluttered; the `Quantity` descriptor class now resides in the imported `model_v4c` module

```
import
```

[![^1]

Import the `model_v4c` module where `Quantity` is implemented.

[![^2]

Put `model.Quantity` to use.

Django users will notice that [Example 23-4](#lineitem_class_v4c) looks a lot like a model definition. It’s no coincidence: Django model fields are descriptors.

Because descriptors are implemented as classes, we can leverage inheritance to reuse some of the code we have for new descriptors. That’s what we’ll do in the following section.