## LineItem Take #5: A New Descriptor Type

The imaginary organic food store hits a snag: somehow a line item instance was created with a blank description, and the order could not be fulfilled. To prevent that, we’ll create a new descriptor, `NonBlank`. As we design `NonBlank`, we realize it will be very much like the `Quantity` descriptor, except for the validation logic.

This prompts a refactoring, producing `Validated`, an abstract class that overrides the `__set__` method, calling a `validate` method that must be implemented by subclasses.

We’ll then rewrite `Quantity`, and implement `NonBlank` by inheriting from `Validated` and just coding the `validate` methods.

The relationship among `Validated`, `Quantity`, and `NonBlank` is an application of the _template method_ as described in the _Design Patterns_ classic:

> A template method defines an algorithm in terms of abstract operations that subclasses override to provide concrete behavior.[^5]

In [Example 23-5](#model_v5_abc), `Validated.__set__` is the template method and `self.validate` is the abstract operation.

##### Example 23-5. model_v5.py: the `Validated` ABC

```
import
```

[![^1]

`__set__` delegates validation to the `validate` method…

[![^2]

…then uses the returned `value` to update the stored value.

[![^3]

`validate` is an abstract method; this is the template method.

Alex Martelli prefers to call this design pattern _Self-Delegation_, and I agree it’s a more descriptive name: the first line of `__set__` self-delegates to `validate`.[^6]

The concrete `Validated` subclasses in this example are `Quantity` and `NonBlank`, shown in [Example 23-6](#model_v5_sub).

##### Example 23-6. model_v5.py: `Quantity` and `NonBlank`, concrete `Validated` subclasses

```
class
```

[![^1]

Implementation of the template method required by the `Validated.validate` abstract method.

[![^2]

If nothing is left after leading and trailing blanks are stripped, reject the value.

[![^3]

Requiring the concrete `validate` methods to return the validated value gives them an opportunity to clean up, convert, or normalize the data received. In this case, `value` is returned without leading or trailing blanks.

Users of _model_v5.py_ don’t need to know all these details. What matters is that they get to use `Quantity` and `NonBlank` to automate the validation of instance attributes. See the latest `LineItem` class in [Example 23-7](#lineitem_class_v5).

##### Example 23-7. bulkfood_v5.py: `LineItem` using `Quantity` and `NonBlank` descriptors

```
import
```

[![^1]

Import the `model_v5` module, giving it a friendlier name.

[![^2]

Put `model.NonBlank` to use. The rest of the code is unchanged.

The `LineItem` examples we’ve seen in this chapter demonstrate a typical use of descriptors to manage data attributes. Descriptors like `Quantity` are called overriding descriptors because its `__set__` method overrides (i.e., intercepts and overrules) the setting of an instance attribute by the same name in the managed instance. However, there are also nonoverriding descriptors. We’ll explore this distinction in detail in the next section.