# More About @dataclass

We’ve only seen simple examples of `@dataclass` use so far. The decorator accepts several keyword arguments. This is its signature:

```
@dataclass
```

The `*` in the first position means the remaining parameters are keyword-only. [Table 5-2](#dataclass_options_tbl) describes them.

Table 5-2. Keyword parameters accepted by the `@dataclass` decorator
|Option|Meaning|Default|Notes|
|---|---|---|---|
|`init`|Generate `__init__`|`True`|Ignored if `__init__` is implemented by user.|
|`repr`|Generate `__repr__`|`True`|Ignored if `__repr__` is implemented by user.|
|`eq`|Generate `__eq__`|`True`|Ignored if `__eq__` is implemented by user.|
|`order`|Generate `__lt__`, `__le__`, `__gt__`, `__ge__`|`False`|If `True`, raises exceptions if `eq=False`, or if any of the comparison methods that would be generated are defined or inherited.|
|`unsafe_hash`|Generate `__hash__`|`False`|Complex semantics and several caveats—see: [dataclass documentation](https://fpy.li/5-7).|
|`frozen`|Make instances “immutable”|`False`|Instances will be reasonably safe from accidental change, but not really immutable.[a](ch05.html#idm46582454217968)|
|[a](ch05.html#idm46582454217968-marker) `@dataclass` emulates immutability by generating `__setattr__` and `__delattr__`, which raise `dataclass.FrozenInstanceError`—a subclass of `AttributeError`—when the user attempts to set or delete a field.|   |   |   |

The defaults are really the most useful settings for common use cases. The options you are more likely to change from the defaults are:

`frozen=True`

Protects against accidental changes to the class instances.

`order=True`

Allows sorting of instances of the data class.

Given the dynamic nature of Python objects, it’s not too hard for a nosy programmer to go around the protection afforded by `frozen=True`. But the necessary tricks should be easy to spot in a code review.

If the `eq` and `frozen` arguments are both `True`, `@dataclass` produces a suitable `__hash__` method, so the instances will be hashable. The generated `__hash__` will use data from all fields that are not individually excluded using a field option we’ll see in [“Field Options”](#field_options_sec). If `frozen=False` (the default), `@dataclass` will set `__hash__` to `None`, signalling that the instances are unhashable, therefore overriding `__hash__` from any superclass.

[PEP 557—Data Classes](https://fpy.li/pep557) has this to say about `unsafe_hash`:

> Although not recommended, you can force Data Classes to create a `__hash__` method with `unsafe_hash=True`. This might be the case if your class is logically immutable but can nonetheless be mutated. This is a specialized use case and should be considered carefully.

I will leave `unsafe_hash` at that. If you feel you must use that option, check the [`dataclasses.dataclass` documentation](https://fpy.li/5-7).

Further customization of the generated data class can be done at a field level.