## Typed Class Attributes

If we type check [Example 5-17](#hackerclub_ex) with Mypy, we are reprimanded:

$ mypy hackerclub.py
hackerclub.py:37: error: Need type annotation for "all_handles"
(hint: "all_handles: Set[<type>] = ...")
Found 1 error in 1 file (checked 1 source file)

Unfortunately, the hint provided by Mypy (version 0.910 as I review this) is not helpful in the context of `@dataclass` usage. First, it suggests using `Set`, but I am using Python 3.9 so I can use `set`—and avoid importing `Set` from `typing`. More importantly, if we add a type hint like `set[…]` to `all_handles`, `@dataclass` will find that annotation and make `all_handles` an instance field. We saw this happening in [“Inspecting a class decorated with dataclass”](#inspecting_dataclass_sec).

The workaround defined in [PEP 526—Syntax for Variable Annotations](https://fpy.li/5-11) is ugly. To code a class variable with a type hint, we need to use a pseudotype named `typing.ClassVar`, which leverages the generics `[]` notation to set the type of the variable and also declare it a class attribute.

To make the type checker and `@dataclass` happy, this is how we are supposed to declare `all_handles` in [Example 5-17](#hackerclub_ex):

    `all_handles``:` `ClassVar``[``set``[``str``]]` `=` `set``()`

That type hint is saying:

> `all_handles` is a class attribute of type `set`-of-`str`, with an empty `set` as its default value.

To code that annotation, we must import `ClassVar` from the `typing` module.

The `@dataclass` decorator doesn’t care about the types in the annotations, except in two cases, and this is one of them: if the type is `ClassVar`, an instance field will not be generated for that attribute.

The other case where the type of the field is relevant to `@dataclass` is when declaring _init-only variables_, our next topic.