## How to Discover the Encoding of a Byte Sequence

How do you find the encoding of a byte sequence? Short answer: you can’t. You must be told.

Some communication protocols and file formats, like HTTP and XML, contain headers that explicitly tell us how the content is encoded. You can be sure that some byte streams are not ASCII because they contain byte values over 127, and the way UTF-8 and UTF-16 are built also limits the possible byte sequences.

##### Leo’s Hack for Guessing UTF-8 Decoding

(The next paragraphs come from a note left by tech reviewer Leonardo Rochael in the draft of this book.)

The way UTF-8 was designed, it’s almost impossible for a random sequence of bytes, or even a nonrandom sequence of bytes coming from a non-UTF-8 encoding, to be decoded accidentally as garbage in UTF-8, instead of raising `UnicodeDecodeError`.

The reasons for this are that UTF-8 escape sequences never use ASCII characters, and these escape sequences have bit patterns that make it very hard for random data to be valid UTF-8 by accident.

So if you can decode some bytes containing codes > 127 as UTF-8, it’s probably UTF-8.

In dealing with Brazilian online services, some of which were attached to legacy backends, I’ve had, on occasion, to implement a decoding strategy of trying to decode via UTF-8 and treat a `UnicodeDecodeError` by decoding via `cp1252`. It was ugly but effective.

However, considering that human languages also have their rules and restrictions, once you assume that a stream of bytes is human _plain text_, it may be possible to sniff out its encoding using heuristics and statistics. For example, if `b'\x00'` bytes are common, it is probably a 16- or 32-bit encoding, and not an 8-bit scheme, because null characters in plain text are bugs. When the byte sequence `b'\x20\x00'` appears often, it is more likely to be the space character (U+0020) in a UTF-16LE encoding, rather than the obscure U+2000 `EN QUAD` character—whatever that is.

That is how the package [“Chardet—The Universal Character Encoding Detector”](https://fpy.li/4-8) works to guess one of more than 30 supported encodings. _Chardet_ is a Python library that you can use in your programs, but also includes a command-line utility, `chardetect`. Here is what it reports on the source file for this chapter:

$ chardetect `04`-text-byte.asciidoc
`04`-text-byte.asciidoc: utf-8 with confidence `0`.99

Although binary sequences of encoded text usually don’t carry explicit hints of their encoding, the UTF formats may prepend a byte order mark to the textual content. That is explained next.