# How Special Methods Are Used

The first thing to know about special methods is that they are meant to be called by the Python interpreter, and not by you. You don’t write `my_object.__len__()`. You write `len(my_object)` and, if `my_object` is an instance of a user-defined class, then Python calls the `__len__` method you implemented.

But the interpreter takes a shortcut when dealing for built-in types like `list`, `str`, `bytearray`, or extensions like the NumPy arrays. Python variable-sized collections written in C include a struct[^2]` retrieves the value of the `ob_size` field, and this is much faster than calling a method.

More often than not, the special method call is implicit. For example, the statement `for i in x:` actually causes the invocation of `iter(x)`, which in turn may call `x.__iter__()` if that is available, or use `x.__getitem__()`, as in the `FrenchDeck` example.

Normally, your code should not have many direct calls to special methods. Unless you are doing a lot of metaprogramming, you should be implementing special methods more often than invoking them explicitly. The only special method that is frequently called by user code directly is `__init__` to invoke the initializer of the superclass in your own `__init__` implementation.

If you need to invoke a special method, it is usually better to call the related built-in function (e.g., `len`, `iter`, `str`, etc.). These built-ins call the corresponding special method, but often provide other services and—for built-in types—are faster than method calls. See, for example, [“Using iter with a Callable”](ch17.html#iter_closer_look) in [Chapter 17](ch17.html#iterables2generators).

In the next sections, we’ll see some of the most important uses of special methods:

- Emulating numeric types
    
- String representation of objects
    
- Boolean value of an object
    
- Implementing collections