# Goose Typing

> An abstract class represents an interface.
> 
> Bjarne Stroustrup, creator of C++[^4]

Python doesn’t have an `interface` keyword. We use abstract base classes (ABCs) to define interfaces for explicit type checking at runtime—also supported by static type checkers.

The _Python Glossary_ entry for [abstract base class](https://fpy.li/13-10) has a good explanation of the value they bring to duck-typed languages:

> Abstract base classes complement duck typing by providing a way to define interfaces when other techniques like `hasattr()` would be clumsy or subtly wrong (for example, with magic methods). ABCs introduce virtual subclasses, which are classes that don’t inherit from a class but are still recognized by `isinstance()` and `issubclass()`; see the `abc` module documentation.[^5]

Goose typing is a runtime type checking approach that leverages ABCs. I will let Alex Martelli explain in [“Waterfowl and ABCs”](#waterfowl_essay).

###### Note

I am very grateful to my friends Alex Martelli and Anna Ravenscroft. I showed them the first outline of _Fluent Python_ at OSCON 2013, and they encouraged me to submit it for publication with O’Reilly. Both later contributed with thorough tech reviews. Alex was already the most cited person in this book, and then he offered to write this essay. Take it away, Alex!

##### Waterfowl and ABCs

**By Alex Martelli**

I’ve been [credited on Wikipedia](https://fpy.li/13-11) for helping spread the helpful meme and sound-bite “_duck typing_” (i.e, ignoring an object’s actual type, focusing instead on ensuring that the object implements the method names, signatures, and semantics required for its intended use).

In Python, this mostly boils down to avoiding the use of `isinstance` to check the object’s type (not to mention the even worse approach of checking, for example, whether `type(foo) is bar`—which is rightly anathema as it inhibits even the simplest forms of inheritance!).

The overall _duck typing_ approach remains quite useful in many contexts—and yet, in many others, an often preferable one has evolved over time. And herein lies a tale…

In recent generations, the taxonomy of genus and species (including, but not limited to, the family of waterfowl known as Anatidae) has mostly been driven by _phenetics_—an approach focused on similarities of morphology and behavior…chiefly, _observable_ traits. The analogy to “duck typing” was strong.

However, parallel evolution can often produce similar traits, both morphological and behavioral ones, among species that are actually unrelated, but just happened to evolve in similar, though separate, ecological niches. Similar “accidental similarities” happen in programming, too—for example, consider the classic object-oriented programming example:

```
class
```

Clearly, the mere existence of a method named `draw`, callable without arguments, is far from sufficient to assure us that two objects `x` and `y`, such that `x.draw()` and `y.draw()` can be called, are in any way exchangeable or abstractly equivalent—nothing about the similarity of the semantics resulting from such calls can be inferred. Rather, we need a knowledgeable programmer to somehow positively _assert_ that such an equivalence holds at some level!

In biology (and other disciplines), this issue has led to the emergence (and, on many facets, the dominance) of an approach that’s an alternative to phenetics, known as _cladistics_—focusing taxonomical choices on characteristics that are inherited from common ancestors, rather than ones that are independently evolved. (Cheap and rapid DNA sequencing can make cladistics highly practical in many more cases in recent years.)

For example, sheldgeese (once classified as being closer to other geese) and shelducks (once classified as being closer to other ducks) are now grouped together within the subfamily Tadornidae (implying they’re closer to each other than to any other Anatidae, as they share a closer common ancestor). Furthermore, DNA analysis has shown, in particular, that the white-winged wood duck is not as close to the Muscovy duck (the latter being a shelduck) as similarity in looks and behavior had long suggested—so the wood duck was reclassified into its own genus, and entirely out of the subfamily!

Does this matter? It depends on the context! For such purposes as deciding how best to cook a waterfowl once you’ve bagged it, for example, specific observable traits (not all of them—plumage, for example, is de minimis in such a context), mostly texture and flavor (old-fashioned phenetics!), may be far more relevant than cladistics. But for other issues, such as susceptibility to different pathogens (whether you’re trying to raise waterfowl in captivity, or preserve them in the wild), DNA closeness can matter much more.

So, by very loose analogy with these taxonomic revolutions in the world of waterfowls, I’m recommending supplementing (not entirely replacing—in certain contexts it shall still serve) good old _duck typing_ with…_goose typing_!

What _goose typing_ means is: `isinstance(obj, cls)` is now just fine…as long as `cls` is an abstract base class—in other words, `cls`’s metaclass is `abc.ABCMeta`.

You can find many useful existing abstract classes in `collections.abc` (and additional ones in the `numbers` module of _The Python Standard Library_).[^6]

Among the many conceptual advantages of ABCs over concrete classes (e.g., Scott Meyer’s “all non-leaf classes should be abstract”; see [Item 33](https://fpy.li/13-12) in his book, _More_ _Effective_ _C++_, Addison-Wesley), Python’s ABCs add one major practical advantage: the `register` class method, which lets end-user code “declare” that a certain class becomes a “virtual” subclass of an ABC (for this purpose, the registered class must meet the ABC’s method name and signature requirements, and more importantly, the underlying semantic contract—but it need not have been developed with any awareness of the ABC, and in particular need not inherit from it!). This goes a long way toward breaking the rigidity and strong coupling that make inheritance something to use with much more caution than typically practiced by most object-oriented programmers.

Sometimes you don’t even need to register a class for an ABC to recognize it as a subclass!

That’s the case for the ABCs whose essence boils down to a few special methods. For example:

```
>>> 
```

As you see, `abc.Sized` recognizes `Struggle` as “a subclass,” with no need for registration, as implementing the special method named `__len__` is all it takes (it’s supposed to be implemented with the proper syntax—callable without arguments—and semantics—returning a nonnegative integer denoting an object’s “length”; any code that implements a specially named method, such as `__len__`, with arbitrary, non-compliant syntax and semantics has much worse problems anyway).

So, here’s my valediction: whenever you’re implementing a class embodying any of the concepts represented in the ABCs in `numbers`, `collections.abc`, or other framework you may be using, be sure (if needed) to subclass it from, or register it into, the corresponding ABC. At the start of your programs using some library or framework defining classes which have omitted to do that, perform the registrations yourself; then, when you must check for (most typically) an argument being, e.g, “a sequence,” check whether:

```
isinstance
```

And, _don’t_ define custom ABCs (or metaclasses) in production code. If you feel the urge to do so, I’d bet it’s likely to be a case of the “all problems look like a nail”–syndrome for somebody who just got a shiny new hammer—you (and future maintainers of your code) will be much happier sticking with straightforward and simple code, eschewing such depths. _Valē!_

To summarize, _goose typing_ entails:

- Subclassing from ABCs to make it explict that you are implementing a previously defined interface.
    
- Runtime type checking using ABCs instead of concrete classes as the second argument for `isinstance` and `issubclass`.
    

Alex makes the point that inheriting from an ABC is more than implementing the required methods: it’s also a clear declaration of intent by the developer. That intent can also be made explicit through registering a virtual subclass.

###### Note

Details of using `register` are covered in [“A Virtual Subclass of an ABC”](#virtual_subclass_sec), later in this chapter. For now, here is a brief example: given the `FrenchDeck` class, if I want it to pass a check like `issubclass(FrenchDeck, Sequence)`, I can make it a _virtual subclass_ of the `Sequence` ABC with these lines:

```
from
```

The use of `isinstance` and `issubclass` becomes more acceptable if you are checking against ABCs instead of concrete classes. If used with concrete classes, type checks limit polymorphism—an essential feature of object-oriented programming. But with ABCs these tests are more flexible. After all, if a component does not implement an ABC by subclassing—but does implement the required methods—it can always be registered after the fact so it passes those explicit type checks.

However, even with ABCs, you should beware that excessive use of `isinstance` checks may be a _code smell_—a symptom of bad OO design.

It’s usually _not_ OK to have a chain of `if/elif/elif` with `isinstance` checks performing different actions depending on the type of object: you should be using polymorphism for that—i.e., design your classes so that the interpreter dispatches calls to the proper methods, instead of you hardcoding the dispatch logic in `if/elif/elif` blocks.

On the other hand, it’s OK to perform an `isinstance` check against an ABC if you must enforce an API contract: “Dude, you have to implement this if you want to call me,” as technical reviewer Lennart Regebro put it. That’s particularly useful in systems that have a plug-in architecture. Outside of frameworks, duck typing is often simpler and more flexible than type checks.

Finally, in his essay, Alex reinforces more than once the need for restraint in the creation of ABCs. Excessive use of ABCs would impose ceremony in a language that became popular because it is practical and pragmatic. During the _Fluent Python_ review process, Alex wrote in an e-mail:

> ABCs are meant to encapsulate very general concepts, abstractions, introduced by a framework—things like “a sequence” and “an exact number.” [Readers] most likely don’t need to write any new ABCs, just use existing ones correctly, to get 99.9% of the benefits without serious risk of misdesign.

Now let’s see goose typing in practice.