## Throttling Requests with a Semaphore

Network clients like the ones we are studying should be _throttled_ (i.e., limited) to avoid pounding the server with too many concurrent requests.

A [_semaphore_](https://fpy.li/21-17) is a synchronization primitive, more flexible than a lock. A semaphore can be held by multiple coroutines, with a configurable maximum number. This makes it ideal to throttle the number of active concurrent coroutines. [“Python’s Semaphores”](#about_semaphores_box) has more information.

In _flags2_threadpool.py_ ([Example 20-16](ch20.html#flags2_threadpool_full)), the throttling was done by instantiating the `ThreadPoolExecutor` with the required `max_workers` argument set to `concur_req` in the `download_many` function. In _flags2_asyncio.py_, an `asyncio.Semaphore` is created by the `supervisor` function (shown in [Example 21-7](#flags2_asyncio_rest)) and passed as the `semaphore` argument to `download_one` in [Example 21-6](#flags2_asyncio_top).

##### Python’s Semaphores

Computer scientist Edsger W. Dijkstra invented the [semaphore](https://fpy.li/21-17) in the early 1960s. It’s a simple idea, but it’s so flexible that most other synchronization objects—such as locks and barriers—can be built on top of semaphores. There are three `Semaphore` classes in Python’s standard library: one in `threading`, another in `multiprocessing`, and a third one in `asyncio`. Here we’ll describe the latter.

An `asyncio.Semaphore` has an internal counter that is decremented whenever we `await` on the `.acquire()` coroutine method, and incremented when we call the `.release()` method—which is not a coroutine because it never blocks. The initial value of the counter is set when the `Semaphore` is instantiated:

    `semaphore` `=` `asyncio``.``Semaphore``(``concur_req``)`

Awaiting on `.acquire()` causes no delay when the counter is greater than zero, but if the counter is zero, `.acquire()` suspends the awaiting coroutine until some other coroutine calls `.release()` on the same `Semaphore`, thus incrementing the counter. Instead of using those methods directly, it’s safer to use the `semaphore` as an asynchronous context manager, as I did in [Example 21-6](#flags2_asyncio_top), function `download_one`:

        `async` `with` `semaphore``:`
            `image` `=` `await` `get_flag``(``client``,` `base_url``,` `cc``)`

The `Semaphore.__aenter__` coroutine method awaits for `.acquire()`, and its `__aexit__` coroutine method calls `.release()`. That snippet guarantees that no more than `concur_req` instances of `get_flags` coroutines will be active at any time.

Each of the `Semaphore` classes in the standard library has a `BoundedSemaphore` subclass that enforces an additional constraint: the internal counter can never become larger than the initial value when there are more `.release()` than `.acquire()` operations.[^7]

Now let’s take a look at the rest of the script in [Example 21-7](#flags2_asyncio_rest).

##### Example 21-7. flags2_asyncio.py: script continued from [Example 21-6](#flags2_asyncio_top)

```
async
```

[![^1]

`supervisor` takes the same arguments as the `download_many` function, but it cannot be invoked directly from `main` because it’s a coroutine and not a plain function like `download_many`.

[![^2]

Create an `asyncio.Semaphore` that will not allow more than `concur_req` active coroutines among those using this semaphore. The value of `concur_req` is computed by the `main` function from _flags2_common.py_, based on command-line options and constants set in each example.

[![^3]

Create a list of coroutine objects, one per call to the `download_one` coroutine.

[![^4]

Get an iterator that will return coroutine objects as they are done. I did not place this call to `as_completed` directly in the `for` loop below because I may need to wrap it with the `tqdm` iterator for the progress bar, depending on the user’s choice for verbosity.

[![^5]

Wrap the `as_completed` iterator with the `tqdm` generator function to display progress.

[![^6]

Declare and initialize `error` with `None`; this variable will be used to hold an exception beyond the `try/except` statement, if one is raised.

[![^7]

Iterate over the completed coroutine objects; this loop is similar to the one in `download_many` in [Example 20-16](ch20.html#flags2_threadpool_full).

[![^8]

`await` on the coroutine to get its result. This will not block because `as_completed` only produces coroutines that are done.

[![^9]

This assignment is necessary because the `exc` variable scope is limited to this `except` clause, but I need to preserve its value for later.

[![^10]

Same as before.

[![^11]

If there was an error, set the `status`.

[![^12]

In verbose mode, extract the URL from the exception that was raised…

[![^13]

…and extract the name of the file to display the country code next.

[![^14]

`download_many` instantiates the `supervisor` coroutine object and passes it to the event loop with `asyncio.run`, collecting the counter `supervisor` returns when the event loop ends.

In [Example 21-7](#flags2_asyncio_rest), we could not use the mapping of futures to country codes we saw in [Example 20-16](ch20.html#flags2_threadpool_full), because the awaitables returned by `asyncio.as_completed` are the same awaitables we pass into the `as_completed` call. Internally, the _asyncio_ machinery may replace the awaitables we provide with others that will, in the end, produce the same results.[^8]

###### Tip

Because I could not use the awaitables as keys to retrieve the country code from a `dict` in case of failure, I had to extract the country code from the exception. To do that, I kept the exception in the `error` variable to retrieve outside of the `try/except` statement. Python is not a block-scoped language: statements such as loops and `try/except` don’t create a local scope in the blocks they manage. But if an `except` clause binds an exception to a variable, like the `exc` variables we just saw—that binding only exists within the block inside that particular `except` clause.

This wraps up the discussion of an _asyncio_ example functionally equivalent to the _flags2_threadpool.py_ we saw earlier.

The next example demonstrates the simple pattern of executing one asynchronous task after another using coroutines. This deserves our attention because anyone with previous experience with JavaScript knows that running one asynchronous function after the other was the reason for the nested coding pattern known as [_pyramid of doom_](https://fpy.li/21-20). The `await` keyword makes that curse go away. That’s why `await` is now part of Python and JavaScript.