## Making Multiple Requests for Each Download

Suppose you want to save each country flag with the name of the country and the country code, instead of just the country code. Now you need to make two HTTP requests per flag: one to get the flag image itself, the other to get the _metadata.json_ file in the same directory as the image—that’s where the name of the country is recorded.

Coordinating multiple requests in the same task is easy in the threaded script: just make one request then the other, blocking the thread twice, and keeping both pieces of data (country code and name) in local variables, ready to use when saving the files. If you needed to do the same in an asynchronous script with callbacks, you needed nested functions so that the country code and name were available in their closures until you could save the file, because each callback runs in a different local scope. The `await` keyword provides relief from that, allowing you to drive the asynchronous requests one after the other, sharing the local scope of the driving coroutine.

###### Tip

If you are doing asynchronous application programming in modern Python with lots of callbacks, you are probably applying old patterns that don’t make sense in modern Python. That is justified if you are writing a library that interfaces with legacy or low-level code that does not support coroutines. Anyway, the StackOverflow Q&A, [“What is the use case for future.add_done_callback()?”](https://fpy.li/21-21) explains why callbacks are needed in low-level code, but are not very useful in Python application-level code these days.

The third variation of the `asyncio` flag downloading script has a few changes:

`get_country`

This new coroutine fetches the _metadata.json_ file for the country code, and gets the name of the country from it.

`download_one`

This coroutine now uses `await` to delegate to `get_flag` and the new `get_country` coroutine, using the result of the latter to build the name of the file to save.

Let’s start with the code for `get_country` ([Example 21-8](#flags3_asyncio_get_country)). Note that it is very similar to `get_flag` from [Example 21-6](#flags2_asyncio_top).

##### Example 21-8. flags3_asyncio.py: `get_country` coroutine

```
async
```

[![^1]

This coroutine returns a string with the country name—if all goes well.

[![^2]

`metadata` will get a Python `dict` built from the JSON contents of the response.

[![^3]

Return the country name.

Now let’s see the modified `download_one` in [Example 21-9](#flags3_asyncio), which has only a few lines changed from the same coroutine in [Example 21-6](#flags2_asyncio_top).

##### Example 21-9. flags3_asyncio.py: `download_one` coroutine

```
async
```

[![^1]

Hold the `semaphore` to `await` for `get_flag`…

[![^2]

…and again for `get_country`.

[![^3]

Use the country name to create a filename. As a command-line user, I don’t like to see spaces in filenames.

Much better than nested callbacks!

I put the calls to `get_flag` and `get_country` in separate `with` blocks controlled by the `semaphore` because it’s good practice to hold semaphores and locks for the shortest possible time.

I could schedule both `get_flag` and `get_country` in parallel using `asyncio.gather`, but if `get_flag` raises an exception, there is no image to save, so it’s pointless to run `get_country`. But there are cases where it makes sense to use `asyncio.gather` to hit several APIs at the same time instead of waiting for one response before making the next request.

In _flags3_asyncio.py_, the `await` syntax appears six times, and `async with` three times. Hopefully, you should be getting the hang of asynchronous programming in Python. One challenge is to know when you have to use `await` and when you can’t use it. The answer in principle is easy: you `await` coroutines and other awaitables, such as `asyncio.Task` instances. But some APIs are tricky, mixing coroutines and plain functions in seemingly arbitrary ways, like the `StreamWriter` class we’ll use in [Example 21-14](#tcp_mojifinder_top).

[Example 21-9](#flags3_asyncio) wrapped up the _flags_ set of examples. Now let’s discuss the use of thread or process executors in asynchronous programming.