## Spinner with Coroutines

###### Note

[Chapter 21](ch21.html#async_ch) is entirely devoted to asynchronous programming with coroutines. This is just a high-level introduction to contrast this approach with the threads and processes concurrency models. As such, we will overlook many details.

It is the job of OS schedulers to allocate CPU time to drive threads and processes. In contrast, coroutines are driven by an application-level event loop that manages a queue of pending coroutines, drives them one by one, monitors events triggered by I/O operations initiated by coroutines, and passes control back to the corresponding coroutine when each event happens. The event loop and the library coroutines and the user coroutines all execute in a single thread. Therefore, any time spent in a coroutine slows down the event loop—and all other coroutines.

The coroutine version of the spinner program is easier to understand if we start from the `main` function, then study the `supervisor`. That’s what [Example 19-4](#spinner_async_start_ex) shows.

##### Example 19-4. spinner_async.py: the `main` function and `supervisor` coroutine

```
def
```

[![^1]

`main` is the only regular function defined in this program—the others are coroutines.

[![^2]

The `asyncio.run` function starts the event loop to drive the coroutine that will eventually set the other coroutines in motion. The `main` function will stay blocked until `supervisor` returns. The return value of `supervisor` will be the return value of `asyncio.run`.

[![^3]

Native coroutines are defined with `async def`.

[![^4]

`asyncio.create_task` schedules the eventual execution of `spin`, immediately returning an instance of `asyncio.Task`.

[![^5]

The `repr` of the `spinner` object looks like `<Task pending name='Task-2' coro=<spin() running at /path/to/spinner_async.py:11>>`.

[![^6]

The `await` keyword calls `slow`, blocking `supervisor` until `slow` returns. The return value of `slow` will be assigned to `result`.

[![^7]

The `Task.cancel` method raises a `CancelledError` exception inside the `spin` coroutine, as we’ll see in [Example 19-5](#spinner_async_top_ex).

[Example 19-4](#spinner_async_start_ex) demonstrates the three main ways of running a coroutine:

`asyncio.run(coro())`

Called from a regular function to drive a coroutine object that usually is the entry point for all the asynchronous code in the program, like the `supervisor` in this example. This call blocks until the body of `coro` returns. The return value of the `run()` call is whatever the body of `coro` returns.

`asyncio.create_task(coro())`

Called from a coroutine to schedule another coroutine to execute eventually. This call does not suspend the current coroutine. It returns a `Task` instance, an object that wraps the coroutine object and provides methods to control and query its state.

`await coro()`

Called from a coroutine to transfer control to the coroutine object returned by `coro()`. This suspends the current coroutine until the body of `coro` returns. The value of the await expression is whatever the body of `coro` returns.

###### Note

Remember: invoking a coroutine as `coro()` immediately returns a coroutine object, but does not run the body of the `coro` function. Driving the body of coroutines is the job of the event loop.

Now let’s study the `spin` and `slow` coroutines in [Example 19-5](#spinner_async_top_ex).

##### Example 19-5. spinner_async.py: the `spin` and `slow` coroutines

```
import
```

[![^1]

We don’t need the `Event` argument that was used to signal that `slow` had completed its job in _spinner_thread.py_ ([Example 19-1](#spinner_thread_top_ex)).

[![^2]

Use `await asyncio.sleep(.1)` instead of `time.sleep(.1)`, to pause without blocking other coroutines. See the experiment after this example.

[![^3]

`asyncio.CancelledError` is raised when the `cancel` method is called on the `Task` controlling this coroutine. Time to exit the loop.

[![^4]

The `slow` coroutine also uses `await asyncio.sleep` instead of `time.sleep`.