## Chapter 2 Review Questions 
### SECTION 2.1
R1. List five nonproprietary Internet applications and the application-layer protocols that they use. 

R2. What is the difference between network architecture and application architecture? 

R3. For a communication session between a pair of processes, which process is the client and which is the server? 

R4. For a P2P file-sharing application, do you agree with the statement, “There is no notion of client and server sides of a communication session”? Why or why not? 

R5. What information is used by a process running on one host to identify a process running on another host? 

R6. Suppose you wanted to do a transaction from a remote client to a server as fast as possible. Would you use UDP or TCP? Why? 

R7. Referring to Figure 2.4, we see that none of the applications listed in Figure 2.4 requires both no data loss and timing. Can you conceive of an application that requires no data loss and that is also highly time-sensitive? 

R8. List the four broad classes of services that a transport protocol can provide. For each of the service classes, indicate if either UDP or TCP (or both) provides such a service. 

R9. Recall that TCP can be enhanced with TLS to provide process-to-process security services, including encryption. Does TLS operate at the transport layer or the application layer? If the application developer wants TCP to be enhanced with TLS, what does the developer have to do? 

### SECTIONS 2.2–2.5

R10. What is meant by a handshaking protocol?

R11. Why do HTTP, SMTP, and IMAP run on top of TCP rather than on UDP? 

R12. Consider an e-commerce site that wants to keep a purchase record for each of its customers. Describe how this can be done with cookies.

R13. Describe how Web caching can reduce the delay in receiving a requested object. Will Web caching reduce the delay for all objects requested by a user or for only some of the objects? Why? 

R14. Telnet into a Web server and send a multiline request message. Include in the request message the If-modified-since: header line to force a response message with the 304 Not Modified status code. 

R15. List several popular messaging apps. Do they use the same protocols as SMS?

R16. Suppose Alice, with a Web-based e-mail account (such as Hotmail or Gmail), sends a message to Bob, who accesses his mail from his mail server using IMAP. Discuss how the message gets from Alice’s host to Bob’s host. Be sure to list the series of application-layer protocols that are used to move the message between the two hosts. 

R17. Print out the header of an e-mail message you have recently received. How many Received: header lines are there? Analyze each of the header lines in the message. 

R18. What is the HOL blocking issue in HTTP/1.1? How does HTTP/2 attempt to solve it? 

R19. Is it possible for an organization’s Web server and mail server to have exactly the same alias for a hostname (for example, foo.com)? What would be the type for the RR that contains the hostname of the mail server? 

R20. Look over your received e-mails, and examine the header of a message sent from a user with a .edu e-mail address. Is it possible to determine from the header the IP address of the host from which the message was sent? Do the same for a message sent from a Gmail account. 

### SECTION 2.5 

R21. In BitTorrent, suppose Alice provides chunks to Bob throughout a 30-second interval. Will Bob necessarily return the favor and provide chunks to Alice in this same interval? Why or why not?

R22. Consider a new peer Alice that joins BitTorrent without possessing any chunks. Without any chunks, she cannot become a top-four uploader for any of the other peers, since she has nothing to upload. How then will Alice get her first chunk? 

R23. What is an overlay network? Does it include routers? What are the edges in the overlay network? 

### SECTION 2.6

R24. CDNs typically adopt one of two different server placement philosophies. Name and briefly describe them.

R25. Besides network-related considerations such as delay, loss, and bandwidth performance, there are other important factors that go into designing a CDN server selection strategy. What are they? 

### SECTION 2.7

R26. In Section 2.7, the UDP server described needed only one socket, whereas the TCP server needed two sockets. Why? If the TCP server were to support n simultaneous connections, each from a different client host, how many sockets would the TCP server need?

R27. For the client-server application over TCP described in Section 2.7, why must the server program be executed before the client program? For the client-server application over UDP, why may the client program be executed before the server program?

## Problems
P1. True or false? a. A user requests a Web page that consists of some text and three images. For this page, the client will send one request message and receive four response messages. b. Two distinct Web pages (for example, www.mit.edu/research .html and www.mit.edu/students.html) can be sent over the same persistent connection. c. With nonpersistent connections between browser and origin server, it is possible for a single TCP segment to carry two distinct HTTP request messages. d. The Date: header in the HTTP response message indicates when the object in the response was last modified. e. HTTP response messages never have an empty message body. P2. SMS, iMessage, Wechat, and WhatsApp are all smartphone real-time messaging systems. After doing some research on the Internet, for each of these systems write one paragraph about the protocols they use. Then write a paragraph explaining how they differ. P3. Consider an HTTP client that wants to retrieve a Web document at a given URL. The IP address of the HTTP server is initially unknown. What transport and application-layer protocols besides HTTP are needed in this scenario? P4. Consider the following string of ASCII characters that were captured by Wireshark when the browser sent an HTTP GET message (i.e., this is the actual content of an HTTP GET message). The characters are carriage return and line-feed characters (that is, the italized character string in the text below represents the single carriage-return character that was contained at that point in the HTTP header). Answer the following questions, indicating where in the HTTP GET message below you find the answer. GET /cs453/index.html HTTP/1.1Host: gai a.cs.umass.eduUser-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 ( Windows;U; Windows NT 5.1; en-US; rv:1.7.2) Gec ko/20040804 Netscape/7.2 (ax) Accept:ex t/xml, application/xml, application/xhtml+xml, text /html;q=0.9, text/plain;q=0.8,image/png,*/*;q=0.5 M02_KURO1557_08_SE_C02.indd 168 12/02/20 4:08 PM PROBLEMS 169 Accept-Language: en-us,en;q=0.5AcceptEncoding: zip,deflateAccept-Charset: ISO -8859-1,utf-8;q=0.7,*;q=0.7Keep-Alive: 300 Connection:keep-alive a. What is the URL of the document requested by the browser? b. What version of HTTP is the browser running? c. Does the browser request a non-persistent or a persistent connection? d. What is the IP address of the host on which the browser is running? e. What type of browser initiates this message? Why is the browser type needed in an HTTP request message? P5. The text below shows the reply sent from the server in response to the HTTP GET message in the question above. Answer the following questions, indicating where in the message below you find the answer. HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Tue, 07 Mar 2008 12:39:45GMTServer: Apache/2.0.52 (Fedora) Last-Modified: Sat, 10 Dec2005 18:27:46 GMTETag: ”526c3-f22-a88a4c80”AcceptRanges: bytesContent-Length: 3874 Keep-Alive: timeout=max=100Connection: Keep-AliveContent-Type: text/html; charset= ISO-8859-1  a. Was the server able to successfully find the document or not? What time was the document reply provided? b. When was the document last modified? c. How many bytes are there in the document being returned? d. What are the first 5 bytes of the document being returned? Did the server agree to a persistent connection? P6. Obtain the HTTP/1.1 specification (RFC 2616). Answer the following questions: a. Explain the mechanism used for signaling between the client and server to indicate that a persistent connection is being closed. Can the client, the server, or both signal the close of a connection? M02_KURO1557_08_SE_C02.indd 169 11/02/20 11:41 AM 170 CHAPTER 2 • APPLICATION LAYER b. What encryption services are provided by HTTP? c. Can a client open three or more simultaneous connections with a given server? d. Either a server or a client may close a transport connection between them if either one detects the connection has been idle for some time. Is it possible that one side starts closing a connection while the other side is transmitting data via this connection? Explain. P7. Suppose within your Web browser you click on a link to obtain a Web page. The IP address for the associated URL is not cached in your local host, so a DNS lookup is necessary to obtain the IP address. Suppose that n DNS servers are visited before your host receives the IP address from DNS; the successive visits incur an RTT of RTT1, . . . , RTTn. Further suppose that the Web page associated with the link contains exactly one object, consisting of a small amount of HTML text. Let RTT0 denote the RTT between the local host and the server containing the object. Assuming zero transmission time of the object, how much time elapses from when the client clicks on the link until the client receives the object? P8. Referring to Problem P7, suppose the HTML file references eight very small objects on the same server. Neglecting transmission times, how much time elapses with a. Non-persistent HTTP with no parallel TCP connections? b. Non-persistent HTTP with the browser configured for 6 parallel connections? c. Persistent HTTP? P9. Consider Figure 2.12, for which there is an institutional network connected to the Internet. Suppose that the average object size is 1,000,000 bits and that the average request rate from the institution’s browsers to the origin servers is 16 requests per second. Also suppose that the amount of time it takes from when the router on the Internet side of the access link forwards an HTTP request until it receives the response is three seconds on average (see Section 2.2.5). Model the total average response time as the sum of the average access delay (that is, the delay from Internet router to institution router) and the average Internet delay. For the average access delay, use ∆/(1 - ∆b), where ∆ is the average time required to send an object over the access link and b is the arrival rate of objects to the access link. a. Find the total average response time. b. Now suppose a cache is installed in the institutional LAN. Suppose the miss rate is 0.4. Find the total response time. P10. Consider a short, 10-meter link, over which a sender can transmit at a rate of 150 bits/sec in both directions. Suppose that packets containing data are 100,000 bits long, and packets containing only control (e.g., ACK or M02_KURO1557_08_SE_C02.indd 170 11/02/20 11:41 AM PROBLEMS 171 handshaking) are 200 bits long. Assume that N parallel connections each get 1/N of the link bandwidth. Now consider the HTTP protocol, and suppose that each downloaded object is 100 Kbits long, and that the initial downloaded object contains 10 referenced objects from the same sender. Would parallel downloads via parallel instances of non-persistent HTTP make sense in this case? Now consider persistent HTTP. Do you expect significant gains over the non-persistent case? Justify and explain your answer. P11. Consider the scenario introduced in the previous problem. Now suppose that the link is shared by Bob with four other users. Bob uses parallel instances of non-persistent HTTP, and the other four users use non-persistent HTTP without parallel downloads. a. Do Bob’s parallel connections help him get Web pages more quickly? Why or why not? b. If all five users open five parallel instances of non-persistent HTTP, then would Bob’s parallel connections still be beneficial? Why or why not? P12. Write a simple TCP program for a server that accepts lines of input from a client and prints the lines onto the server’s standard output. (You can do this by modifying the TCPServer.py program in the text.) Compile and execute your program. On any other machine that contains a Web browser, set the proxy server in the browser to the host that is running your server program; also configure the port number appropriately. Your browser should now send its GET request messages to your server, and your server should display the messages on its standard output. Use this platform to determine whether your browser generates conditional GET messages for objects that are locally cached. P13. Consider sending over HTTP/2 a Web page that consists of one video clip, and five images. Suppose that the video clip is transported as 2000 frames, and each image has three frames. a. If all the video frames are sent first without interleaving, how many “frame times” are needed until all five images are sent? b. If frames are interleaved, how many frame times are needed until all five images are sent. P14. Consider the Web page in problem 13. Now HTTP/2 prioritization is employed. Suppose all the images are given priority over the video clip, and that the first image is given priority over the second image, the second image over the third image, and so on. How many frame times will be needed until the second image is sent? P15. What is the difference between MAIL FROM: in SMTP and From: in the mail message itself? P16. How does SMTP mark the end of a message body? How about HTTP? Can HTTP use the same method as SMTP to mark the end of a message body? Explain. M02_KURO1557_08_SE_C02.indd 171 11/02/20 11:41 AM 172 CHAPTER 2 • APPLICATION LAYER P17. Read RFC 5321 for SMTP. What does MTA stand for? Consider the following received spam e-mail (modified from a real spam e-mail). Assuming only the originator of this spam e-mail is malicious and all other hosts are honest, identify the malacious host that has generated this spam e-mail. From - Fri Nov 07 13:41:30 2008 Return-Path: Received: from barmail.cs.umass.edu (barmail.cs.umass. edu [128.119.240.3]) by cs.umass.edu (8.13.1/8.12.6) for ; Fri, 7 Nov 2008 13:27:10 -0500 Received: from asusus-4b96 (localhost [127.0.0.1]) by barmail.cs.umass.edu (Spam Firewall) for ; Fri, 7 Nov 2008 13:27:07 -0500 (EST) Received: from asusus-4b96 ([58.88.21.177]) by barmail. cs.umass.edu for ; Fri, 07 Nov 2008 13:27:07 -0500 (EST) Received: from [58.88.21.177] by inbnd55.exchangeddd. com; Sat, 8 Nov 2008 01:27:07 +0700 From: ”Jonny” To: Subject: How to secure your savings P18. a. What is a whois database? b. Use various whois databases on the Internet to obtain the names of two DNS servers. Indicate which whois databases you used. c. Use nslookup on your local host to send DNS queries to three DNS servers: your local DNS server and the two DNS servers you found in part (b). Try querying for Type A, NS, and MX reports. Summarize your findings. d. Use nslookup to find a Web server that has multiple IP addresses. Does the Web server of your institution (school or company) have multiple IP addresses? e. Use the ARIN whois database to determine the IP address range used by your university. f. Describe how an attacker can use whois databases and the nslookup tool to perform reconnaissance on an institution before launching an attack. g. Discuss why whois databases should be publicly available. M02_KURO1557_08_SE_C02.indd 172 12/02/20 3:39 PM PROBLEMS 173 P19. In this problem, we use the useful dig tool available on Unix and Linux hosts to explore the hierarchy of DNS servers. Recall that in Figure 2.19, a DNS server in the DNS hierarchy delegates a DNS query to a DNS server lower in the hierarchy, by sending back to the DNS client the name of that lower-level DNS server. First read the man page for dig, and then answer the following questions. a. Starting with a root DNS server (from one of the root servers [a-m]. root-servers.net), initiate a sequence of queries for the IP address for your department’s Web server by using dig. Show the list of the names of DNS servers in the delegation chain in answering your query. b. Repeat part (a) for several popular Web sites, such as google.com, yahoo .com, or amazon.com. P20. Suppose you can access the caches in the local DNS servers of your department. Can you propose a way to roughly determine the Web servers (outside your department) that are most popular among the users in your department? Explain. P21. Suppose that your department has a local DNS server for all computers in the department. You are an ordinary user (i.e., not a network/system administrator). Can you determine if an external Web site was likely accessed from a computer in your department a couple of seconds ago? Explain. P22. Consider distributing a file of F = 20 Gbits to N peers. The server has an upload rate of us = 30 Mbps, and each peer has a download rate of di = 2 Mbps and an upload rate of u. For N = 10, 100, and 1,000 and u = 300 Kbps, 700 Kbps, and 2 Mbps, prepare a chart giving the minimum distribution time for each of the combinations of N and u for both clientserver distribution and P2P distribution. P23. Consider distributing a file of F bits to N peers using a client-server architecture. Assume a fluid model where the server can simultaneously transmit to multiple peers, transmitting to each peer at different rates, as long as the combined rate does not exceed us. a. Suppose that us/N … dmin. Specify a distribution scheme that has a distribution time of NF/us. b. Suppose that us/N Ú dmin. Specify a distribution scheme that has a distribution time of F/dmin. c. Conclude that the minimum distribution time is in general given by max5NF/us, F/dmin6. P24. Consider distributing a file of F bits to N peers using a P2P architecture. Assume a fluid model. For simplicity assume that dmin is very large, so that peer download bandwidth is never a bottleneck. a. Suppose that us … (us + u1 + . . . + uN)/N. Specify a distribution scheme that has a distribution time of F/us. M02_KURO1557_08_SE_C02.indd 173 11/02/20 11:41 AM 174 CHAPTER 2 • APPLICATION LAYER b. Suppose that us Ú (us + u1 + . . . + uN)/N. Specify a distribution scheme that has a distribution time of NF/(us + u1 + . . . + uN). c. Conclude that the minimum distribution time is in general given by max5F/us, NF/(us + u1 + . . . + uN)6. P25. Consider an overlay network with N active peers, with each pair of peers having an active TCP connection. Additionally, suppose that the TCP connections pass through a total of M routers. How many nodes and edges are there in the corresponding overlay network? P26. Suppose Bob joins a BitTorrent torrent, but he does not want to upload any data to any other peers (so called free-riding). a. Bob claims that he can receive a complete copy of the file that is shared by the swarm. Is Bob’s claim possible? Why or why not? b. Bob further claims that he can further make his “free-riding” more efficient by using a collection of multiple computers (with distinct IP addresses) in the computer lab in his department. How can he do that? P27. Consider a DASH system for which there are N video versions (at N different rates and qualities) and N audio versions (at N different rates and qualities). Suppose we want to allow the player to choose at any time any of the N video versions and any of the N audio versions. a. If we create files so that the audio is mixed in with the video, so server sends only one media stream at given time, how many files will the server need to store (each a different URL)? b. If the server instead sends the audio and video streams separately and has the client synchronize the streams, how many files will the server need to store? P28. Install and compile the Python programs TCPClient and UDPClient on one host and TCPServer and UDPServer on another host. a. Suppose you run TCPClient before you run TCPServer. What happens? Why? b. Suppose you run UDPClient before you run UDPServer. What happens? Why? c. What happens if you use different port numbers for the client and server sides? P29. Suppose that in UDPClient.py, after we create the socket, we add the line: clientSocket.bind((’’, 5432)) Will it become necessary to change UDPServer.py? What are the port numbers for the sockets in UDPClient and UDPServer? What were they before making this change? M02_KURO1557_08_SE_C02.indd 174 11/02/20 11:41 AM SOCKET PROGRAMMING ASSIGNMENTS 175 P30. Can you configure your browser to open multiple simultaneous connections to a Web site? What are the advantages and disadvantages of having a large number of simultaneous TCP connections? P31. We have seen that Internet TCP sockets treat the data being sent as a byte stream but UDP sockets recognize message boundaries. What are one advantage and one disadvantage of byte-oriented API versus having the API explicitly recognize and preserve application-defined message boundaries? P32. What is the Apache Web server? How much does it cost? What functionality does it currently have? You may want to look at Wikipedia to answer this question.