## Metaclass Evaluation Time Experiment

This is a variation of [“Evaluation Time Experiments”](#evaldemo_sec), adding a metaclass to the mix. The _builderlib.py_ module is the same as before, but the main script is now _evaldemo_meta.py_, listed in [Example 24-16](#evaldemo_meta_ex).

##### Example 24-16. evaldemo_meta.py: experimenting with a metaclass

```
#!/usr/bin/env python3
```

[![^1]

Import `MetaKlass` from _metalib.py_, which we’ll see in [Example 24-18](#metalib_bottom_ex).

[![^2]

Declare `Klass` as a subclass of `Builder` and an instance of `MetaKlass`.

[![^3]

This method is injected by `MetaKlass.__new__`, as we’ll see.

###### Warning

In the interest of science, [Example 24-16](#evaldemo_meta_ex) defies all reason and applies three different metaprogramming techniques together on `Klass`: a decorator, a base class using `__init_subclass__`, and a custom metaclass. If you do this in production code, please don’t blame me. Again, the goal is to observe the order in which the three techniques interfere in the class construction process.

As in the previous evaluation time experiment, this example does nothing but print messages revealing the flow of execution. [Example 24-17](#metalib_top_ex) shows the code for the top part of _metalib.py_—the rest is in [Example 24-18](#metalib_bottom_ex).

##### Example 24-17. metalib.py: the `NosyDict` class

```
print
```

I wrote the `NosyDict` class to override `__setitem__` to display each `key` and `value` as they are set. The metaclass will use a `NosyDict` instance to hold the namespace of the class under construction, revealing more of Python’s inner workings.

The main attraction of _metalib.py_ is the metaclass in [Example 24-18](#metalib_bottom_ex). It implements the `__prepare__` special method, a class method that Python only invokes on metaclasses. The `__prepare__` method provides the earliest opportunity to influence the process of creating a new class.

###### Tip

When coding a metaclass, I find it useful to adopt this naming convention for special method arguments:

- Use `cls` instead of `self` for instance methods, because the instance is a class.
    
- Use `meta_cls` instead of `cls` for class methods, because the class is a metaclass. Recall that `__new__` behaves as a class method even without the `@classmethod` decorator.
    

##### Example 24-18. metalib.py: the `MetaKlass`

```
class
```

[![^1]

`__prepare__` should be declared as a class method. It is not an instance method because the class under construction does not exist yet when Python calls `__prepare__`.

[![^2]

Python calls `__prepare__` on a metaclass to obtain a mapping to hold the namespace of the class under construction.

[![^3]

Return `NosyDict` instance to be used as the namespace.

[![^4]

`cls_dict` is a `NosyDict` instance returned by `__prepare__`.

[![^5]

`type.__new__` requires a real `dict` as the last argument, so I give it the `data` attribute of `NosyDict`, inherited from `UserDict`.

[![^6]

Inject a method in the newly created class.

[![^7]

As usual, `__new__` must return the object just created—in this case, the new class.

[![^8]

Defining `__repr__` on a metaclass allows customizing the `repr()` of class objects.

The main use case for `__prepare__` before Python 3.6 was to provide an `OrderedDict` to hold the attributes of the class under construction, so that the metaclass `__new__` could process those attributes in the order in which they appear in the source code of the user’s class definition. Now that `dict` preserves the insertion order, `__prepare__` is rarely needed. You will see a creative use for it in [“A Metaclass Hack with __prepare__”](#metahack_sec).

Importing _metalib.py_ in the Python console is not very exciting. Note the use of `%` to prefix the lines output by this module:

```
>>> 
```

Lots of things happen if you import _evaldemo_meta.py_, as you can see in [Example 24-19](#evaldemo_meta_console_ex).

##### Example 24-19. Console experiment with _evaldemo_meta.py_

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

The lines before this are the result of importing _builderlib.py_ and _metalib.py_.

[![^2]

Python invokes `__prepare__` to start processing a `class` statement.

[![^3]

Before parsing the class body, Python adds the `__module__` and `__qualname__` entries to the namespace of the class under construction.

[![^4]

The descriptor instance is created…

[![^5]

…and bound to `attr` in the class namespace.

[![^6]

`__init__` and `__repr__` methods are defined and added to the namespace.

[![^7]

Once Python finishes processing the class body, it calls `MetaKlass.__new__`.

[![^8]

`__set_name__`, `__init_subclass__`, and the decorator are invoked in this order, after the `__new__` method of the metaclass returns the newly constructed class.

If you run _evaldemo_meta.py_ as script, `main()` is called, and a few more things happen ([Example 24-20](#evaldemo_meta_script_ex)).

##### Example 24-20. Running _evaldemo_meta.py_ as a program

$ ./evaldemo_meta.py
[... 20 lines omitted ...]
@ deco(<class 'Klass' built by MetaKlass>)  [![^1]
@ Builder.__init__(<Klass instance>)
# Klass.__init__(<Klass instance>)
@ SuperA.__init_subclass__:inner_0(<Klass instance>)
@ deco:inner_1(<Klass instance>)
% MetaKlass.__new__:inner_2(<Klass instance>)  [![^2]
@ Descriptor.__set__(<Descriptor instance>, <Klass instance>, 999)
# evaldemo_meta module end

[![^1]

The top 21 lines—including this one—are the same shown in [Example 24-19](#evaldemo_meta_console_ex).

[![^2]

Triggered by `obj.method_c()` in `main`; `method_c` was injected by `MetaKlass.__new__`.

Let’s now go back to the idea of the `Checked` class with the `Field` descriptors implementing runtime type validation, and see how it can be done with a metaclass.