## How Slicing Works

A demo is worth a thousand words, so take a look at [Example 12-4](#ex_slice0).

##### Example 12-4. Checking out the behavior of `__getitem__` and slices

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

For this demonstration, `__getitem__` merely returns whatever is passed to it.

[![^2]

A single index, nothing new.

[![^3]

The notation `1:4` becomes `slice(1, 4, None)`.

[![^4]

`slice(1, 4, 2)` means start at 1, stop at 4, step by 2.

[![^5]

Surprise: the presence of commas inside the `[]` means `__getitem__` receives a tuple.

[![^6]

The tuple may even hold several `slice` objects.

Now let’s take a closer look at `slice` itself in [Example 12-5](#ex_slice1).

##### Example 12-5. Inspecting the attributes of the `slice` class

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`slice` is a built-in type (we saw it first in [“Slice Objects”](ch02.html#slice_objects)).

[![^2]

Inspecting a `slice`, we find the data attributes `start`, `stop`, and `step`, and an `indices` method.

In [Example 12-5](#ex_slice1), calling `dir(slice)` reveals an `indices` attribute, which turns out to be a very interesting but little-known method. Here is what `help(slice.indices)` reveals:

`S.indices(len) -> (start, stop, stride)`

Assuming a sequence of length `len`, calculate the `start` and `stop` indices, and the `stride` length of the extended slice described by `S`. Out-of-bounds indices are clipped just like they are in a normal slice.

In other words, `indices` exposes the tricky logic that’s implemented in the built-in sequences to gracefully handle missing or negative indices and slices that are longer than the original sequence. This method produces “normalized” tuples of nonnegative `start`, `stop`, and `stride` integers tailored to a sequence of the given length.

Here are a couple of examples, considering a sequence of `len == 5`, e.g., `'ABCDE'`:

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`'ABCDE'[:10:2]` is the same as `'ABCDE'[0:5:2]`.

[![^2]

`'ABCDE'[-3:]` is the same as `'ABCDE'[2:5:1]`.

In our `Vector` code, we’ll not need the `slice.indices()` method because when we get a slice argument we’ll delegate its handling to the `_components` `array`. But if you can’t count on the services of an underlying sequence, this method can be a huge time saver.

Now that we know how to handle slices, let’s take a look at the improved `Vector.__getitem__` implementation.