## A Slice-Aware __getitem__

[Example 12-6](#ex_vector_v2) lists the two methods needed to make `Vector` behave as a sequence: `__len__` and `__getitem__` (the latter now implemented to handle slicing correctly).

##### Example 12-6. Part of vector_v2.py: `__len__` and `__getitem__` methods added to `Vector` class from vector_v1.py (see [Example 12-2](#ex_vector_v1))

```
    
```

[![^1]

If the `key` argument is a `slice`…

[![^2]

…get the class of the instance (i.e., `Vector`) and…

[![^3]

…invoke the class to build another `Vector` instance from a slice of the `_components` array.

[![^4]

If we can get an `index` from `key`…

[![^5]

…return the specific item from `_components`.

The `operator.index()` function calls the `__index__` special method. The function and the special method were defined in [PEP 357—Allowing Any Object to be Used for Slicing](https://fpy.li/pep357), proposed by Travis Oliphant to allow any of the numerous types of integers in NumPy to be used as indexes and slice arguments. The key difference between `operator.index()` and `int()` is that the former is intended for this specific purpose. For example, `int(3.14)` returns `3`, but `operator.index(3.14)` raises `TypeError` because a `float` should not be used as an index.

###### Note

Excessive use of `isinstance` may be a sign of bad OO design, but handling slices in `__getitem__` is a justified use case. In the first edition, I also used an `isinstance` test on `key` to test if it was an integer. Using `operator.index` avoids this test, and raises `Type​Error` with a very informative message if we can’t get the `index` from `key`. See the last error message from [Example 12-7](#ex_vector_v2_demo).

Once the code in [Example 12-6](#ex_vector_v2) is added to the `Vector` class, we have proper slicing behavior, as [Example 12-7](#ex_vector_v2_demo) demonstrates.

##### Example 12-7. Tests of enhanced `Vector.__getitem__` from [Example 12-6](#ex_vector_v2)

```
    >>> v7 = Vector(range(7))
```

[![^1]

An integer index retrieves just one component value as a `float`.

[![^2]

A slice index creates a new `Vector`.

[![^3]

A slice of `len == 1` also creates a `Vector`.

[![^4]

`Vector` does not support multidimensional indexing, so a tuple of indices or slices raises an error.