### Shortcut syntax for function definition

Scheme has an alternative `define` syntax to create a named function without using a nested `lambda`. This is the syntax:

```
(
```

The `define` keyword is followed by a list with the `name` of the new function and zero or more parameter names. After that list comes the function body with one or more expressions.

Adding these two lines to the `match` takes care of the implementation:

        `case` `[``'define'``,` `[``Symbol``()` `as` `name``,` `*``parms``],` `*``body``]` `if` `body``:`
            `env``[``name``]` `=` `Procedure``(``parms``,` `body``,` `env``)`

I’d place that `case` after the other `define` case in [Example 2-12](#ex_match_eval). The order between the `define` cases is irrelevant in this example because no subject can match both of these patterns: the second element must be a `Symbol` in the original `define` case, but it must be a sequence starting with a `Symbol` in the `define` shortcut for function definition.

Now consider how much work we’d have adding support for this second `define` syntax without the help of pattern matching in [Example 2-11](#ex_norvigs_eval). The `match` statement does a lot more than the `switch` in C-like languages.

Pattern matching is an example of declarative programming: the code describes “what” you want to match, instead of “how” to match it. The shape of the code follows the shape of the data, as [Table 2-2](#syntax_and_pattern_tbl) illustrates.

Table 2-2. Some Scheme syntactic forms and `case` patterns to handle them
|Scheme syntax|Sequence pattern|
|---|---|
|`(quote exp)`|`['quote', exp]`|
|`(if test conseq alt)`|`['if', test, conseq, alt]`|
|`(lambda (parms…) body1 body2…)`|`['lambda', [*parms], *body] if body`|
|`(define name exp)`|`['define', Symbol() as name, exp]`|
|`(define (name parms…) body1 body2…)`|`['define', [Symbol() as name, *parms], *body] if body`|

I hope this refactoring of Norvig’s `evaluate` with pattern matching convinced you that `match/case` can make your code more readable and safer.

###### Note

We’ll see more of _lis.py_ in [“Pattern Matching in lis.py: A Case Study”](ch18.html#pattern_matching_case_study_sec), when we’ll review the complete `match/case` example in `evaluate`. If you want to learn more about Norvig’s _lis.py_, read his wonderful post [“(How to Write a (Lisp) Interpreter (in Python))”](https://fpy.li/2-12).

This concludes our first tour of unpacking, destructuring, and pattern matching with sequences. We’ll cover other types of patterns in later chapters.

Every Python programmer knows that sequences can be sliced using the `s[a:b]` syntax. We now turn to some less well-known facts about slicing.