## Pattern Matching Sequences in an Interpreter

Peter Norvig of Stanford University wrote [_lis.py_](https://fpy.li/2-11): an interpreter for a subset of the Scheme dialect of the Lisp programming language in 132 lines of beautiful and readable Python code. I took Norvig’s MIT-licensed source and updated it to Python 3.10 to showcase pattern matching. In this section, we’ll compare a key part of Norvig’s code—which uses `if/elif` and unpacking—with a rewrite using `match/case`.

The two main functions of _lis.py_ are `parse` and `evaluate`.[^5] The parser takes Scheme parenthesized expressions and returns Python lists. Here are two examples:

```
>>>
```

The evaluator takes lists like these and executes them. The first example is calling a `gcd` function with `18` and `45` as arguments. When evaluated, it computes the greatest common divisor of the arguments: 9. The second example is defining a function named `double` with a parameter `n`. The body of the function is the expression `(* n 2)`. The result of calling a function in Scheme is the value of the last expression in its body.

Our focus here is destructuring sequences, so I will not explain the evaluator actions. See [“Pattern Matching in lis.py: A Case Study”](ch18.html#pattern_matching_case_study_sec) to learn more about how _lis.py_ works.

[Example 2-11](#ex_norvigs_eval) shows Norvig’s evaluator with minor changes, abbreviated to show only the sequence patterns.

##### Example 2-11. Matching patterns without `match/case`

```
def
```

Note how each `elif` clause checks the first item of the list, and then unpacks the list, ignoring the first item. The extensive use of unpacking suggests that Norvig is a fan of pattern matching, but he wrote that code originally for Python 2 (though it now works with any Python 3).

Using `match/case` in Python ≥ 3.10, we can refactor `evaluate` as shown in [Example 2-12](#ex_match_eval).

##### Example 2-12. Pattern matching with `match/case`—requires Python ≥ 3.10

```
def
```

[![^1]

Match if subject is a two-item sequence starting with `'quote'`.

[![^2]

Match if subject is a four-item sequence starting with `'if'`.

[![^3]

Match if subject is a sequence of three or more items starting with `'lambda'`. The guard ensures that `body` is not empty.

[![^4]

Match if subject is a three-item sequence starting with `'define'`, followed by an instance of `Symbol`.

[![^5]

It is good practice to have a catch-all `case`. In this example, if `exp` doesn’t match any of the patterns, the expression is malformed, and I raise `SyntaxError`.

Without a catch-all, the whole `match` statement does nothing when a subject does not match any case—and this can be a silent failure.

Norvig deliberately avoided error checking in _lis.py_ to keep the code easy to understand. With pattern matching, we can add more checks and still keep it readable. For example, in the `'define'` pattern, the original code does not ensure that `name` is an instance of `Symbol`—that would require an `if` block, an `isinstance` call, and more code. [Example 2-12](#ex_match_eval) is shorter and safer than [Example 2-11](#ex_norvigs_eval).