## A Default Parameter Value

The `show_count` function in [Example 8-1](#msgs_no_hints) only works with regular nouns. If the plural can’t be spelled by appending an `'s'`, we should let the user provide the plural form, like this:

```
>>> 
```

Let’s do a little “type-driven development.” First we add a test that uses that third argument. Don’t forget to add the return type hint to the test function, otherwise Mypy will not check it.

```
def
```

Mypy detects the error:

```
…
```

Now I edit `show_count`, adding the optional `plural` parameter in [Example 8-3](#msgs_optional_str_param).

##### Example 8-3. `showcount` from _hints_2/messages.py_ with an optional parameter

```
def
```

Now Mypy reports “Success.”

###### Warning

Here is one typing mistake that Python does not catch. Can you spot it?

```
def
```

Mypy’s error report is not very helpful:

colors.py:24: error: Function is missing a type
    annotation for one or more arguments

The type hint for the `color` argument should be `color: str`. I wrote `color=str`, which is not an annotation: it sets the default value of `color` to `str`.

In my experience, it’s a common mistake and easy to overlook, especially in complicated type hints.

The following details are considered good style for type hints:

- No space between the parameter name and the `:`; one space after the `:`
    
- Spaces on both sides of the `=` that precedes a default parameter value
    

On the other hand, PEP 8 says there should be no spaces around the `=` if there is no type hint for that particular parameter.

##### Code Style: Use flake8 and blue

Instead of memorizing such silly rules, use tools like [_flake8_](https://fpy.li/8-9) and [_blue_](https://fpy.li/8-10). _flake8_ reports on code styling, among many other issues, and _blue_ rewrites source code according to (most) rules embedded in the [_black_](https://fpy.li/8-11) code formatting tool.

Given the goal of enforcing a “standard” coding style, _blue_ is better than _black_ because it follows Python’s own style of using single quotes by default, double quotes as an alternative:

```
>>>
```

The preference for single quotes is embedded in `repr()`, among other places in CPython. The [_doctest_](https://fpy.li/doctest) module depends on `repr()` using single quotes by default.

One of the authors of _blue_ is [Barry Warsaw](https://fpy.li/8-12), coauthor of PEP 8, Python core developer since 1994, and a member of Python’s Steering Council from 2019 to present (July 2021). We are in very good company when we choose single quotes by default.

If you must use _black_, use the `black -S` option. Then it will leave your quotes as they are.