## Using None as a Default

In [Example 8-3](#msgs_optional_str_param), the parameter `plural` is annotated as `str`, and the default value is `''`, so there is no type conflict.

I like that solution, but in other contexts `None` is a better default. If the optional parameter expects a mutable type, then `None` is the only sensible default—as we saw in [“Mutable Types as Parameter Defaults: Bad Idea”](ch06.html#mutable_default_parameter_sec).

To have `None` as the default for the `plural` parameter, here is what the signature would look like:

```
from
```

Let’s unpack that:

- `Optional[str]` means `plural` may be a `str` or `None`.
    
- You must explicitly provide the default value `= None`.
    

If you don’t assign a default value to `plural`, the Python runtime will treat it as a required parameter. Remember: at runtime, type hints are ignored.

Note that we need to import `Optional` from the `typing` module. When importing types, it’s good practice to use the syntax `from typing import X` to reduce the length of the function signatures.

###### Warning

`Optional` is not a great name, because that annotation does not make the parameter optional. What makes it optional is assigning a default value to the parameter. `Optional[str]` just means: the type of this parameter may be `str` or `NoneType`. In the Haskell and Elm languages, a similar type is named `Maybe`.

Now that we’ve had a first practical view of gradual typing, let’s consider what the concept of _type_ means in practice.