## Positional Class Patterns

Given the definitions from [Example 5-22](#ex_cities_match), the following function would return a list of Asian cities, using a positional class pattern:

```
def
```

The pattern `City('Asia')` matches any `City` instance where the first attribute value is `'Asia'`, regardless of the values of the other attributes.

If you want to collect the value of the `country` attribute, you could write:

```
def
```

The pattern `City('Asia', _, country)` matches the same cities as before, but now the `country` variable is bound to the third attribute of the instance.

I’ve mentioned “first” or “third” attribute, but what does that really mean?

What makes `City` or any class work with positional patterns is the presence of a special class attribute named `__match_args__`, which the class builders in this chapter automatically create. This is the value of `__match_args__` in the `City` class:

```
>>> 
```

As you can see, `__match_args__` declares the names of the attributes in the order they will be used in positional patterns.

In [“Supporting Positional Pattern Matching”](ch11.html#positional_pattern_implement_sec) we’ll write code to define `__match_args__` for a class we’ll create without the help of a class builder.

###### Tip

You can combine keyword and positional arguments in a pattern. Some, but not all, of the instance attributes available for matching may be listed in `__match_args__`. Therefore, sometimes you may need to use keyword arguments in addition to positional arguments in a pattern.

Time for a chapter summary.