# Enhancing the asyncio Downloader

Recall from [“Downloads with Progress Display and Error Handling”](ch20.html#flags2_sec) that the `flags2` set of examples share the same command-line interface, and they display a progress bar while the downloads are happening. They also include error handling.

###### Tip

I encourage you to play with the `flags2` examples to develop an intuition of how concurrent HTTP clients perform. Use the `-h` option to see the help screen in [Example 20-10](ch20.html#flags2_help_demo). Use the `-a`, `-e`, and `-l` command-line options to control the number of downloads, and the `-m` option to set the number of concurrent downloads. Run tests against the `LOCAL`, `REMOTE`, `DELAY`, and `ERROR` servers. Discover the optimum number of concurrent downloads to maximize throughput against each server. Tweak the options for the test servers, as described in [“Setting Up Test Servers”](ch20.html#setting_up_servers_box).

For instance, [Example 21-5](#flags2_asyncio_run_repeat) shows an attempt to get 100 flags (`-al 100`) from the `ERROR` server, using 100 concurrent requests (`-m 100`). The 48 errors in the result are either HTTP 418 or time-out errors—the expected (mis)behavior of the _slow_server.py_.

##### Example 21-5. Running flags2_asyncio.py

$ python3 flags2_asyncio.py -s ERROR -al 100 -m 100
ERROR site: http://localhost:8002/flags
Searching for 100 flags: from AD to LK
100 concurrent connections will be used.
100%|█████████████████████████████████████████| 100/100 [00:03<00:00, 30.48it/s]
--------------------
 52 flags downloaded.
 48 errors.
Elapsed time: 3.31s

# Act Responsibly When Testing Concurrent Clients

Even if the overall download time is not much different between the threaded and _asyncio_ HTTP clients, _asyncio_ can send requests faster, so it’s more likely that the server will suspect a DoS attack. To really exercise these concurrent clients at full throttle, please use local HTTP servers for testing, as explained in [“Setting Up Test Servers”](ch20.html#setting_up_servers_box).

Now let’s see how _flags2_asyncio.py_ is implemented.