## Using asyncio.as_completed and a Thread

In [Example 21-3](#flags_asyncio_ex), we passed several coroutines to `asyncio.gather`, which returns a list with results of the coroutines in the order they were submitted. This means that `asyncio.gather` can only return when all the awaitables are done. However, to update a progress bar, we need to get results as they are done.

Fortunately, there is an `asyncio` equivalent of the `as_completed` generator function we used in the thread pool example with the progress bar ([Example 20-16](ch20.html#flags2_threadpool_full)).

[Example 21-6](#flags2_asyncio_top) shows the top of the _flags2_asyncio.py_ script where the `get_flag` and `download_one` coroutines are defined. [Example 21-7](#flags2_asyncio_rest) lists the rest of the source, with `supervisor` and `download_many`. This script is longer than _flags_asyncio.py_ because of error handling.

##### Example 21-6. flags2_asyncio.py: top portion of the script; remaining code is in [Example 21-7](#flags2_asyncio_rest)

```
import
```

[![^1]

`get_flag` is very similar to the sequential version in [Example 20-14](ch20.html#flags2_basic_http_ex). First difference: it requires the `client` parameter.

[![^2]

Second and third differences: `.get` is an `AsyncClient` method, and it’s a coroutine, so we need to `await` it.

[![^3]

Use the `semaphore` as an asynchronous context manager so that the program as a whole is not blocked; only this coroutine is suspended when the semaphore counter is zero. More about this in [“Python’s Semaphores”](#about_semaphores_box).

[![^4]

The error handling logic is the same as in `download_one`, from [Example 20-14](ch20.html#flags2_basic_http_ex).

[![^5]

Saving the image is an I/O operation. To avoid blocking the event loop, run `save_flag` in a thread.

All network I/O is done with coroutines in _asyncio_, but not file I/O. However, file I/O is also “blocking”—in the sense that reading/writing files takes [thousands of times longer](https://fpy.li/21-15) than reading/writing to RAM. If you’re using [Network-Attached Storage](https://fpy.li/21-16), it may even involve network I/O under the covers.

Since Python 3.9, the `asyncio.to_thread` coroutine makes it easy to delegate file I/O to a thread pool provided by _asyncio_. If you need to support Python 3.7 or 3.8, [“Delegating Tasks to Executors”](#delegating_to_executors_sec) shows how to add a couple of lines to do it. But first, let’s finish our study of the HTTP client code.