# Overloaded Signatures

Python functions may accept different combinations of arguments. The `@typing.overload` decorator allows annotating those different combinations. This is particularly important when the return type of the function depends on the type of two or more parameters.

Consider the `sum` built-in function. This is the text of `help(sum)`:

>>> help(sum)
sum(iterable, /, start=0)
    Return the sum of a 'start' value (default: 0) plus an iterable of numbers

    When the iterable is empty, return the start value.
    This function is intended specifically for use with numeric values and may
    reject non-numeric types.

The `sum` built-in is written in C, but _typeshed_ has overloaded type hints for it, in [_builtins.pyi_](https://fpy.li/15-2):

```
@overload
```

First let’s look at the overall syntax of overloads. That’s all the code about the `sum` you’ll find in the stub file (_.pyi_). The implementation would be in a different file. The ellipsis (`...`) has no function other than to fulfill the syntactic requirement for a function body, similar to `pass`. So _.pyi_ files are valid Python files.

As mentioned in [“Annotating Positional Only and Variadic Parameters”](ch08.html#arbitrary_arguments_sec), the two leading underscores in `__iterable` are a PEP 484 convention for positional-only arguments that is enforced by Mypy. It means you can call `sum(my_list)`, but not `sum(__iterable = my_list)`.

The type checker tries to match the given arguments with each overloaded signature, in order. The call `sum(range(100), 1000)` doesn’t match the first overload, because that signature has only one parameter. But it matches the second.

You can also use `@overload` in a regular Python module, by writing the overloaded signatures right before the function’s actual signature and implementation. [Example 15-1](#sum_overload_ex) shows how `sum` would appear annotated and implemented in a Python module.

##### Example 15-1. _mysum.py_: definition of the `sum` function with overloaded signatures

```
import
```

[![^1]

We need this second `TypeVar` in the second overload.

[![^2]

This signature is for the simple case: `sum(my_iterable)`. The result type may be `T`—the type of the elements that `my_iterable` yields—or it may be `int` if the iterable is empty, because the default value of the `start` parameter is `0`.

[![^3]

When `start` is given, it can be of any type `S`, so the result type is `Union[T, S]`. This is why we need `S`. If we reused `T`, then the type of `start` would have to be the same type as the elements of `Iterable[T]`.

[![^4]

The signature of the actual function implementation has no type hints.

That’s a lot of lines to annotate a one-line function. Probably overkill, I know. At least it wasn’t a `foo` function.

If you want to learn about `@overload` by reading code, _typeshed_ has hundreds of examples. On _typeshed_, the [stub file](https://fpy.li/15-3) for Python’s built-ins has 186 overloads as I write this—more than any other in the standard library.

# Take Advantage of Gradual Typing

Aiming for 100% of annotated code may lead to type hints that add lots of noise but little value. Refactoring to simplify type hinting can lead to cumbersome APIs. Sometimes it’s better to be pragmatic and leave a piece of code without type hints.

The handy APIs we call Pythonic are often hard to annotate. In the next section we’ll see an example: six overloads are needed to properly annotate the flexible `max` built-in function.