## Simple Measure of __slot__ Savings

[Example 11-16](#ex_vector2d_v3_slots) shows the implementation of `__slots__` in `Vector2d`.

##### Example 11-16. vector2d_v3_slots.py: the `__slots__` attribute is the only addition to `Vector2d`

```
class
```

[![^1]

`__match_args__` lists the public attribute names for positional pattern matching.

[![^2]

In contrast, `__slots__` lists the names of the instance attributes, which in this case are private attributes.

To measure the memory savings, I wrote the _mem_test.py_ script. It takes the name of a module with a `Vector2d` class variant as command-line argument, and uses a list comprehension to build a `list` with 10,000,000 instances of `Vector2d`. In the first run shown in [Example 11-17](#mem_test_demo), I use `vector2d_v3.Vector2d` (from [Example 11-7](#ex_vector2d_v3)); in the second run, I use the version with `__slots__` from [Example 11-16](#ex_vector2d_v3_slots).

##### Example 11-17. mem_test.py creates 10 million `Vector2d` instances using the class defined in the named module

$ `time` python3 mem_test.py vector2d_v3
Selected Vector2d type: vector2d_v3.Vector2d
Creating `10`,000,000 Vector2d instances
Initial RAM usage:      `6`,983,680
  Final RAM usage:  `1`,666,535,424

real	0m11.990s
user	0m10.861s
sys	0m0.978s
$ `time` python3 mem_test.py vector2d_v3_slots
Selected Vector2d type: vector2d_v3_slots.Vector2d
Creating `10`,000,000 Vector2d instances
Initial RAM usage:      `6`,995,968
  Final RAM usage:    `577`,839,104

real	0m8.381s
user	0m8.006s
sys	0m0.352s

As [Example 11-17](#mem_test_demo) reveals, the RAM footprint of the script grows to 1.55 GiB when instance `__dict__` is used in each of the 10 million `Vector2d` instances, but that is reduced to 551 MiB when `Vector2d` has a `__slots__` attribute. The `__slots__` version is also faster. The _mem_test.py_ script in this test basically deals with loading a module, checking memory usage, and formatting results. You can find its source code in the [_fluentpython/example-code-2e_ repository](https://fpy.li/11-11).

###### Tip

If you are handling millions of objects with numeric data, you should really be using NumPy arrays (see [“NumPy”](ch02.html#numpy_sec)), which are not only memory efficient but have highly optimized functions for numeric processing, many of which operate on the entire array at once. I designed the `Vector2d` class just to provide context when discussing special methods, because I try to avoid vague `foo` and `bar` examples when I can.