# Saving Memory with __slots__

By default, Python stores the attributes of each instance in a `dict` named `__dict__`. As we saw in [“Practical Consequences of How dict Works”](ch03.html#consequences_dict_internals), a `dict` has a significant memory overhead—even with the optimizations mentioned in that section. But if you define a class attribute named `__slots__` holding a sequence of attribute names, Python uses an alternative storage model for the instance attributes: the attributes named in `__slots__` are stored in a hidden array or references that use less memory than a `dict`. Let’s see how that works through simple examples, starting with [Example 11-13](#slots_ex1).

##### Example 11-13. The `Pixel` class uses `__slots__`

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`__slots__` must be present when the class is created; adding or changing it later has no effect. The attribute names may be in a `tuple` or `list`, but I prefer a `tuple` to make it clear there’s no point in changing it.

[![^2]

Create an instance of `Pixel`, because we see the effects of `__slots__` on the instances.

[![^3]

First effect: instances of `Pixel` have no `__dict__`.

[![^4]

Set the `p.x` and `p.y` attributes normally.

[![^5]

Second effect: trying to set an attribute not listed in `__slots__` raises `AttributeError`.

So far, so good. Now let’s create a subclass of `Pixel` in [Example 11-14](#slots_ex2) to see the counterintuitive side of `__slots__`.

##### Example 11-14. The `OpenPixel` is a subclass of `Pixel`

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`OpenPixel` declares no attributes of its own.

[![^2]

Surprise: instances of `OpenPixel` have a `__dict__`.

[![^3]

If you set attribute `x` (named in the `__slots__` of the base class `Pixel`)…

[![^4]

…it is not stored in the instance `__dict__`…

[![^5]

…but it is stored in the hidden array of references in the instance.

[![^6]

If you set an attribute not named in the `__slots__`…

[![^7]

…it is stored in the instance `__dict__`.

[Example 11-14](#slots_ex2) shows that the effect of `__slots__` is only partially inherited by a subclass. To make sure that instances of a subclass have no `__dict__`, you must declare `__slots__` again in the subclass.

If you declare `__slots__ = ()` (an empty tuple), then the instances of the subclass will have no `__dict__` and will only accept the attributes named in the `__slots__` of the base class.

If you want a subclass to have additional attributes, name them in `__slots__`, as shown in [Example 11-15](#slots_ex3).

##### Example 11-15. The `ColorPixel`, another subclass of `Pixel`

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Essentially, `__slots__` of the superclasses are added to the `__slots__` of the current class. Don’t forget that single-item tuples must have a trailing comma.

[![^2]

`ColorPixel` instances have no `__dict__`.

[![^3]

You can set the attributes declared in the `__slots__` of this class and superclasses, but no other.

It’s possible to “save memory and eat it too”: if you add the `'__dict__'` name to the `__slots__` list, your instances will keep attributes named in `__slots__` in the per-instance array of references, but will also support dynamically created attributes, which will be stored in the usual `__dict__`. This is necessary if you want to use the `@cached_property` decorator (covered in [“Step 5: Caching Properties with functools”](ch22.html#caching_properties_sec)).

Of course, having `'__dict__'` in `__slots__` may entirely defeat its purpose, depending on the number of static and dynamic attributes in each instance and how they are used. Careless optimization is worse than premature optimization: you add complexity but may not get any benefit.

Another special per-instance attribute that you may want to keep is `__weakref__`, necessary for an object to support weak references (mentioned briefly in [“del and Garbage Collection”](ch06.html#del_sec)). That attribute exists by default in instances of user-defined classes. However, if the class defines `__slots__`, and you need the instances to be targets of weak references, then you need to include `'__weakref__'` among the attributes named in `__slots__`.

Now let’s see the effect of adding `__slots__` to `Vector2d`.