## Tuples as Records

Tuples hold records: each item in the tuple holds the data for one field, and the position of the item gives its meaning.

If you think of a tuple just as an immutable list, the quantity and the order of the items may or may not be important, depending on the context. But when using a tuple as a collection of fields, the number of items is usually fixed and their order is always important.

[Example 2-7](#ex_tuples_as_records) shows tuples used as records. Note that in every expression, sorting the tuple would destroy the information because the meaning of each field is given by its position in the tuple.

##### Example 2-7. Tuples used as records

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Latitude and longitude of the Los Angeles International Airport.

[![^2]

Data about Tokyo: name, year, population (thousands), population change (%), and area (km²).

[![^3]

A list of tuples of the form `(country_code, passport_number)`.

[![^4]

As we iterate over the list, `passport` is bound to each tuple.

[![^5]

The `%` formatting operator understands tuples and treats each item as a separate field.

[![^6]

The `for` loop knows how to retrieve the items of a tuple separately—this is called “unpacking.” Here we are not interested in the second item, so we assign it to `_`, a dummy variable.

###### Tip

In general, using `_` as a dummy variable is just a convention. It’s just a strange but valid variable name. However, in a `match/case` statement, `_` is a wildcard that matches any value but is not bound to a value. See [“Pattern Matching with Sequences”](#sequence_patterns_sec). And in the Python console, the result of the preceding command is assigned to `_`—unless the result is `None`.

We often think of records as data structures with named fields. [Chapter 5](ch05.html#data_class_ch) presents two ways of creating tuples with named fields.

But often, there’s no need to go through the trouble of creating a class just to name the fields, especially if you leverage unpacking and avoid using indexes to access the fields. In [Example 2-7](#ex_tuples_as_records), we assigned `('Tokyo', 2003, 32_450, 0.66, 8014)` to `city, year, pop, chg, area` in a single statement. Then, the `%` operator assigned each item in the `passport` tuple to the corresponding slot in the format string in the `print` argument. Those are two examples of _tuple unpacking_.

###### Note

The term _tuple unpacking_ is widely used by Pythonistas, but _iterable unpacking_ is gaining traction, as in the title of [PEP 3132 — Extended Iterable Unpacking](https://fpy.li/2-2).

[“Unpacking Sequences and Iterables”](#iterable_unpacking_sec) presents a lot more about unpacking not only tuples, but sequences and iterables in general.

Now let’s consider the `tuple` class as an immutable variant of the `list` class.