## Defensive Programming with Mutable Parameters

When you are coding a function that receives a mutable parameter, you should carefully consider whether the caller expects the argument passed to be changed.

For example, if your function receives a `dict` and needs to modify it while processing it, should this side effect be visible outside of the function or not? Actually it depends on the context. It’s really a matter of aligning the expectation of the coder of the function and that of the caller.

The last bus example in this chapter shows how a `TwilightBus` breaks expectations by sharing its passenger list with its clients. Before studying the implementation, see in [Example 6-14](#demo_twilight_bus) how the `TwilightBus` class works from the perspective of a client of the class.

##### Example 6-14. Passengers disappear when dropped by a `TwilightBus`

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`basketball_team` holds five student names.

[![^2]

A `TwilightBus` is loaded with the team.

[![^3]

The `bus` drops one student, then another.

[![^4]

The dropped passengers vanished from the basketball team!

`TwilightBus` violates the “Principle of least astonishment,” a best practice of interface design.[^3] It surely is astonishing that when the bus drops a student, their name is removed from the basketball team roster.

[Example 6-15](#ex_twilight_bus) is the implementation `TwilightBus` and an explanation of the problem.

##### Example 6-15. A simple class to show the perils of mutating received arguments

```
class
```

[![^1]

Here we are careful to create a new empty list when `passengers` is `None`.

[![^2]

However, this assignment makes `self.passengers` an alias for `passengers`, which is itself an alias for the actual argument passed to `__init__` (i.e., `basketball_team` in [Example 6-14](#demo_twilight_bus)).

[![^3]

When the methods `.remove()` and `.append()` are used with `self.passengers`, we are actually mutating the original list received as an argument to the constructor.

The problem here is that the bus is aliasing the list that is passed to the constructor. Instead, it should keep its own passenger list. The fix is simple: in `__init__`, when the `passengers` parameter is provided, `self.passengers` should be initialized with a copy of it, as we did correctly in [Example 6-8](#ex_bus1):

```
    
```

[![^1]

Make a copy of the `passengers` list, or convert it to a `list` if it’s not one.

Now our internal handling of the passenger list will not affect the argument used to initialize the bus. As a bonus, this solution is more flexible: now the argument passed to the `passengers` parameter may be a `tuple` or any other iterable, like a `set` or even database results, because the `list` constructor accepts any iterable. As we create our own list to manage, we ensure that it supports the necessary `.remove()` and `.append()` operations we use in the `.pick()` and `.drop()` methods.

###### Tip

Unless a method is explicitly intended to mutate an object received as an argument, you should think twice before aliasing the argument object by simply assigning it to an instance variable in your class. If in doubt, make a copy. Your clients will be happier. Of course, making a copy is not free: there is a cost in CPU and memory. However, an API that causes subtle bugs is usually a bigger problem than one that is a little slower or uses more resources.

Now let’s talk about one of the most misunderstood of Python’s statements: `del`.