## Mutable Types as Parameter Defaults: Bad Idea

Optional parameters with default values are a great feature of Python function definitions, allowing our APIs to evolve while remaining backward compatible. However, you should avoid mutable objects as default values for parameters.

To illustrate this point, in [Example 6-12](#ex_haunted_bus), we take the `Bus` class from [Example 6-8](#ex_bus1) and change its `__init__` method to create `HauntedBus`. Here we tried to be clever, and instead of having a default value of `passengers=None`, we have `passengers=[]`, thus avoiding the `if` in the previous `__init__`. This “cleverness” gets us into trouble.

##### Example 6-12. A simple class to illustrate the danger of a mutable default

```
class
```

[![^1]

When the `passengers` argument is not passed, this parameter is bound to the default list object, which is initially empty.

[![^2]

This assignment makes `self.passengers` an alias for `passengers`, which is itself an alias for the default list, when no `passengers` argument is given.

[![^3]

When the methods `.remove()` and `.append()` are used with `self.passengers`, we are actually mutating the default list, which is an attribute of the function object.

[Example 6-13](#demo_haunted_bus) shows the eerie behavior of the `HauntedBus`.

##### Example 6-13. Buses haunted by ghost passengers

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`bus1` starts with a two-passenger list.

[![^2]

So far, so good: no surprises with `bus1`.

[![^3]

`bus2` starts empty, so the default empty list is assigned to `self.passengers`.

[![^4]

`bus3` also starts empty, again the default list is assigned.

[![^5]

The default is no longer empty!

[![^6]

Now `Dave`, picked by `bus3`, appears in `bus2`.

[![^7]

The problem: `bus2.passengers` and `bus3.passengers` refer to the same list.

[![^8]

But `bus1.passengers` is a distinct list.

The problem is that `HauntedBus` instances that don’t get an initial passenger list end up sharing the same passenger list among themselves.

Such bugs may be subtle. As [Example 6-13](#demo_haunted_bus) demonstrates, when a `HauntedBus` is instantiated with passengers, it works as expected. Strange things happen only when a `HauntedBus` starts empty, because then `self.passengers` becomes an alias for the default value of the `passengers` parameter. The problem is that each default value is evaluated when the function is defined—i.e., usually when the module is loaded—and the default values become attributes of the function object. So if a default value is a mutable object, and you change it, the change will affect every future call of the function.

After running the lines in [Example 6-13](#demo_haunted_bus), you can inspect the `HauntedBus.__init__` object and see the ghost students haunting its `__defaults__` attribute:

```
>>> 
```

Finally, we can verify that `bus2.passengers` is an alias bound to the first element of the `HauntedBus.__init__.__defaults__` attribute:

```
>>> 
```

The issue with mutable defaults explains why `None` is commonly used as the default value for parameters that may receive mutable values. In [Example 6-8](#ex_bus1), `__init__` checks whether the `passengers` argument is `None`. If it is, `self.passengers` is bound to a new empty list. If `passengers` is not `None`, the correct implementation binds a copy of that argument to `self.passengers`. The next section explains why copying the argument is a good practice.