## Choosing Between == and is

The `==` operator compares the values of objects (the data they hold), while `is` compares their identities.

While programming, we often care more about values than object identities, so `==` appears more frequently than `is` in Python code.

However, if you are comparing a variable to a singleton, then it makes sense to use `is`. By far, the most common case is checking whether a variable is bound to `None`. This is the recommended way to do it:

```
x
```

And the proper way to write its negation is:

```
x
```

`None` is the most common singleton we test with `is`. Sentinel objects are another example of singletons we test with `is`. Here is one way to create and test a sentinel object:

```
END_OF_DATA
```

The `is` operator is faster than `==`, because it cannot be overloaded, so Python does not have to find and invoke special methods to evaluate it, and computing is as simple as comparing two integer IDs. In contrast, `a == b` is syntactic sugar for `a.__eq__(b)`. The `__eq__` method inherited from `object` compares object IDs, so it produces the same result as `is`. But most built-in types override `__eq__` with more meaningful implementations that actually take into account the values of the object attributes. Equality may involve a lot of processing—for example, when comparing large collections or deeply nested structures.

###### Warning

Usually we are more interested in object equality than identity. Checking for `None` is the _only_ common use case for the `is` operator. Most other uses I see while reviewing code are wrong. If you are not sure, use `==`. It’s usually what you want, and also works with `None`—albeit not as fast.

To wrap up this discussion of identity versus equality, we’ll see that the famously immutable `tuple` is not as unchanging as you may expect.