## The Relative Immutability of Tuples

Tuples, like most Python collections—lists, dicts, sets, etc.—are containers: they hold references to objects.[^2], and does not extend to the referenced objects.

[Example 6-5](#ex_mutable_tuples) illustrates the situation in which the value of a tuple changes as a result of changes to a mutable object referenced in it. What can never change in a tuple is the identity of the items it contains.

##### Example 6-5. `t1` and `t2` initially compare equal, but changing a mutable item inside tuple `t1` makes it different

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`t1` is immutable, but `t1[-1]` is mutable.

[![^2]

Build a tuple `t2` whose items are equal to those of `t1`.

[![^3]

Although distinct objects, `t1` and `t2` compare equal, as expected.

[![^4]

Inspect the identity of the list at `t1[-1]`.

[![^5]

Modify the `t1[-1]` list in place.

[![^6]

The identity of `t1[-1]` has not changed, only its value.

[![^7]

`t1` and `t2` are now different.

This relative immutability of tuples is behind the riddle [“A += Assignment Puzzler”](ch02.html#tuple_puzzler). It’s also the reason why some tuples are unhashable, as we’ve seen in [“What Is Hashable”](ch03.html#what_is_hashable).

The distinction between equality and identity has further implications when you need to copy an object. A copy is an equal object with a different ID. But if an object contains other objects, should the copy also duplicate the inner objects, or is it OK to share them? There’s no single answer. Read on for a discussion.