## Max Overload

It is difficult to add type hints to functions that leverage the powerful dynamic features of Python.

While studying typeshed, I found bug report [#4051](https://fpy.li/shed4051): Mypy failed to warn that it is illegal to pass `None` as one of the arguments to the built-in `max()` function, or to pass an iterable that at some point yields `None`. In either case, you get a runtime exception like this one:

TypeError: '>' not supported between instances of 'int' and 'NoneType'

The documentation of `max` starts with this sentence:

> Return the largest item in an iterable or the largest of two or more arguments.

To me, that’s a very intuitive description.

But if I must annotate a function described in those terms, I have to ask: which is it? An iterable or two or more arguments?

The reality is more complicated because `max` also takes two optional keyword arguments: `key` and `default`.

I coded `max` in Python to make it easier to see the relationship between how it works and the overloaded annotations (the built-in `max` is in C); see [Example 15-2](#mymax_ex).

##### Example 15-2. _mymax.py_: Python rewrite of `max` function

```
# imports and definitions omitted, see next listing
```

The focus of this example is not the logic of `max`, so I will not spend time with its implementation, other than explaining `MISSING`. The `MISSING` constant is a unique `object` instance used as a sentinel. It is the default value for the `default=` keyword argument, so that `max` can accept `default=None` and still distinguish between these two situations:

1. The user did not provide a value for `default=`, so it is `MISSING`, and `max` raises `ValueError` if `first` is an empty iterable.
    
2. The user provided some value for `default=`, including `None`, so `max` returns that value if `first` is an empty iterable.
    

To fix [issue #4051](https://fpy.li/shed4051), I wrote the code in [Example 15-3](#mymax_types_ex).[^2]

##### Example 15-3. _mymax.py_: top of the module, with imports, definitions, and overloads

```
from
```

My Python implementation of `max` is about the same length as all those typing imports and declarations. Thanks to duck typing, my code has no `isinstance` checks, and provides the same error checking as those type hints—but only at runtime, of course.

A key benefit of `@overload` is declaring the return type as precisely as possible, according to the types of the arguments given. We’ll see that benefit next by studying the overloads for `max` in groups of one or two at a time.