# del and Garbage Collection

> Objects are never explicitly destroyed; however, when they become unreachable they may be garbage-collected.
> 
> “Data Model” chapter of _The Python Language Reference_

The first strange fact about `del` is that it’s not a function, it’s a statement. We write `del x` and not `del(x)`—although the latter also works, but only because the expressions `x` and `(x)` usually mean the same thing in Python.

The second surprising fact is that `del` deletes references, not objects. Python’s garbage collector may discard an object from memory as an indirect result of `del`, if the deleted variable was the last reference to the object. Rebinding a variable may also cause the number of references to an object to reach zero, causing its destruction.

`>>>` `a` `=` `[``1``,` `2``]`  [![^1]
`>>>` `b` `=` `a`       [![^2]
`>>>` `del` `a`       [![^3]
`>>>` `b`           [![^4]
`[1, 2]`
`>>>` `b` `=` `[``3``]`     [![^5]

[![^1]

Create object `[1, 2]` and bind `a` to it.

[![^2]

Bind `b` to the same `[1, 2]` object.

[![^3]

Delete reference `a`.

[![^4]

`[1, 2]` was not affected, because `b` still points to it.

[![^5]

Rebinding `b` to a different object removes the last remaining reference to `[1, 2]`. Now the garbage collector can discard that object.

###### Warning

There is a `__del__` special method, but it does not cause the disposal of the instance, and should not be called by your code. `__del__` is invoked by the Python interpreter when the instance is about to be destroyed to give it a chance to release external resources. You will seldom need to implement `__del__` in your own code, yet some Python programmers spend time coding it for no good reason. The proper use of `__del__` is rather tricky. See the [`__del__` special method documentation](https://fpy.li/6-6) in the “Data Model” chapter of _The Python Language Reference_.

In CPython, the primary algorithm for garbage collection is reference counting. Essentially, each object keeps count of how many references point to it. As soon as that _refcount_ reaches zero, the object is immediately destroyed: CPython calls the `__del__` method on the object (if defined) and then frees the memory allocated to the object. In CPython 2.0, a generational garbage collection algorithm was added to detect groups of objects involved in reference cycles—which may be unreachable even with outstanding references to them, when all the mutual references are contained within the group. Other implementations of Python have more sophisticated garbage collectors that do not rely on reference counting, which means the `__del__` method may not be called immediately when there are no more references to the object. See [“PyPy, Garbage Collection, and a Deadlock”](https://fpy.li/6-7) by A. Jesse Jiryu Davis for discussion of improper and proper use of `__del__`.

To demonstrate the end of an object’s life, [Example 6-16](#ex_finalize) uses `weakref.finalize` to register a callback function to be called when an object is destroyed.

##### Example 6-16. Watching the end of an object when no more references point to it

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`s1` and `s2` are aliases referring to the same set, `{1, 2, 3}`.

[![^2]

This function must not be a bound method of the object about to be destroyed or otherwise hold a reference to it.

[![^3]

Register the `bye` callback on the object referred by `s1`.

[![^4]

The `.alive` attribute is `True` before the `finalize` object is called.

[![^5]

As discussed, `del` did not delete the object, just the `s1` reference to it.

[![^6]

Rebinding the last reference, `s2`, makes `{1, 2, 3}` unreachable. It is destroyed, the `bye` callback is invoked, and `ender.alive` becomes `False`.

The point of [Example 6-16](#ex_finalize) is to make explicit that `del` does not delete objects, but objects may be deleted as a consequence of being unreachable after `del` is used.

You may be wondering why the `{1, 2, 3}` object was destroyed in [Example 6-16](#ex_finalize). After all, the `s1` reference was passed to the `finalize` function, which must have held on to it in order to monitor the object and invoke the callback. This works because `finalize` holds a _weak reference_ to `{1, 2, 3}`. Weak references to an object do not increase its reference count. Therefore, a weak reference does not prevent the target object from being garbage collected. Weak references are useful in caching applications because you don’t want the cached objects to be kept alive just because they are referenced by the cache.

###### Note

Weak references is a very specialized topic. That’s why I chose to skip it in this second edition. Instead, I published [“Weak References” on _fluentpython.com_](https://fpy.li/weakref).