# Tricks Python Plays with Immutables

###### Note

This optional section discusses some Python details that are not really important for _users_ of Python, and that may not apply to other Python implementations or even future versions of CPython. Nevertheless, I’ve seen people stumble upon these corner cases and then start using the `is` operator incorrectly, so I felt they were worth mentioning.

I was surprised to learn that, for a tuple `t`, `t[:]` does not make a copy, but returns a reference to the same object. You also get a reference to the same tuple if you write `tuple(t)`.[^4] proves it.

##### Example 6-17. A tuple built from another is actually the same exact tuple

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`t1` and `t2` are bound to the same object.

[![^2]

And so is `t3`.

The same behavior can be observed with instances of `str`, `bytes`, and `frozenset`. Note that a `frozenset` is not a sequence, so `fs[:]` does not work if `fs` is a `frozenset`. But `fs.copy()` has the same effect: it cheats and returns a reference to the same object, and not a copy at all, as [Example 6-18](#ex_same_string) shows.[^5]

##### Example 6-18. String literals may create shared objects

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

Creating a new tuple from scratch.

[![^2]

`t1` and `t3` are equal, but not the same object.

[![^3]

Creating a second `str` from scratch.

[![^4]

Surprise: `a` and `b` refer to the same `str`!

The sharing of string literals is an optimization technique called _interning_. CPython uses a similar technique with small integers to avoid unnecessary duplication of numbers that appear frequently in programs like 0, 1, –1, etc. Note that CPython does not intern all strings or integers, and the criteria it uses to do so is an undocumented implementation detail.

###### Warning

Never depend on `str` or `int` interning! Always use `==` instead of `is` to compare strings or integers for equality. Interning is an optimization for internal use of the Python interpreter.

The tricks discussed in this section, including the behavior of `frozenset.copy()`, are harmless “lies” that save memory and make the interpreter faster. Do not worry about them, they should not give you any trouble because they only apply to immutable types. Probably the best use of these bits of trivia is to win bets with fellow Pythonistas.[^6]