# Further Reading

The [“Data Model” chapter](https://fpy.li/dtmodel) of _The Python Language Reference_ starts with a clear explanation of object identities and values.

Wesley Chun, author of the _Core Python_ series of books, presented [Understanding Python’s Memory Model, Mutability, and Methods](https://fpy.li/6-8) at EuroPython 2011, covering not only the theme of this chapter but also the use of special methods.

Doug Hellmann wrote the posts [“copy – Duplicate Objects”](https://fpy.li/6-9) and [“weakref—Garbage-Collectable References to Objects”](https://fpy.li/6-10) covering some of the topics we just discussed.

More information on the CPython generational garbage collector can be found in the [gc module documentation](https://fpy.li/6-11), which starts with the sentence “This module provides an interface to the optional garbage collector.” The “optional” qualifier here may be surprising, but the [“Data Model” chapter](https://fpy.li/dtmodel) also states:

> An implementation is allowed to postpone garbage collection or omit it altogether—it is a matter of implementation quality how garbage collection is implemented, as long as no objects are collected that are still reachable.

Pablo Galindo wrote more in-depth treatment of Python’s GC in [“Design of CPython’s Garbage Collector”](https://fpy.li/6-12) in the [_Python Developer’s Guide_](https://fpy.li/6-13), aimed at new and experienced contributors to the CPython implementation.

The CPython 3.4 garbage collector improved handling of objects with a `__del__` method, as described in [PEP 442—Safe object finalization](https://fpy.li/6-14).

Wikipedia has an article about [string interning](https://fpy.li/6-15), mentioning the use of this technique in several languages, including Python.

Wikipedia also as an article on [“Haddocks’ Eyes”](https://fpy.li/6-16), the Lewis Carroll song I quoted at the top of this chapter. The Wikipedia editors wrote that the lyrics are used in works on logic and philosophy “to elaborate on the symbolic status of the concept of _name_: a name as identification marker may be assigned to anything, including another name, thus introducing different levels of symbolization.”

##### Soapbox

Equal Treatment to All Objects

I learned Java before I discovered Python. The `==` operator in Java never felt right to me. It is much more common for programmers to care about equality than identity, but for objects (not primitive types), the Java `==` compares references, and not object values. Even for something as basic as comparing strings, Java forces you to use the `.equals` method. Even then, there is another catch: if you write `a.equals(b)` and `a` is `null`, you get a null pointer exception. The Java designers felt the need to overload `+` for strings, so why not go ahead and overload `==` as well?

Python gets this right. The `==` operator compares object values; `is` compares references. And because Python has operator overloading, `==` works sensibly with all objects in the standard library, including `None`, which is a proper object, unlike Java’s `null`.

And of course, you can define `__eq__` in your own classes to decide what `==` means for your instances. If you don’t override `__eq__`, the method inherited from `object` compares object IDs, so the fallback is that every instance of a user-defined class is considered different.

These are some of the things that made me switch from Java to Python as soon as I finished reading _The Python Tutorial_ one afternoon in September 1998.

Mutability

This chapter would not be necessary if all Python objects were immutable. When you are dealing with unchanging objects, it makes no difference whether variables hold the actual objects or references to shared objects. If `a == b` is true, and neither object can change, they might as well be the same. That’s why string interning is safe. Object identity becomes important only when objects are mutable.

In “pure” functional programming, all data is immutable: appending to a collection actually creates a new collection. Elixir is one easy to learn, practical functional language in which all built-in types are immutable, including lists.

Python, however, is not a functional language, much less a pure one. Instances of user-defined classes are mutable by default in Python—as in most object-oriented languages. When creating your own objects, you have to be extra careful to make them immutable, if that is a requirement. Every attribute of the object must also be immutable, otherwise you end up with something like the `tuple`: immutable as far as object IDs go, but the value of a `tuple` may change if it holds a mutable object.

Mutable objects are also the main reason why programming with threads is so hard to get right: threads mutating objects without proper synchronization produce corrupted data. Excessive synchronization, on the other hand, causes deadlocks. The Erlang language and platform—which includes Elixir—was designed to maximize uptime in highly concurrent, distributed applications such as telecommunications switches. Naturally, they chose immutable data by default.

Object Destruction and Garbage Collection

There is no mechanism in Python to directly destroy an object, and this omission is actually a great feature: if you could destroy an object at any time, what would happen to existing references pointing to it?

Garbage collection in CPython is done primarily by reference counting, which is easy to implement, but is prone to memory leaking when there are reference cycles, so with version 2.0 (October 2000) a generational garbage collector was implemented, and it is able to dispose of unreachable objects kept alive by reference cycles.

But the reference counting is still there as a baseline, and it causes the immediate disposal of objects with zero references. This means that, in CPython—at least for now—it’s safe to write this:

```
open
```

That code is safe because the reference count of the file object will be zero after the `write` method returns, and Python will immediately close the file before destroying the object representing it in memory. However, the same line is not safe in Jython or IronPython that use the garbage collector of their host runtimes (the Java VM and the .NET CLR), which are more sophisticated but do not rely on reference counting and may take longer to destroy the object and close the file. In all cases, including CPython, the best practice is to explicitly close the file, and the most reliable way of doing it is using the `with` statement, which guarantees that the file will be closed even if exceptions are raised while it is open. Using `with`, the previous snippet becomes:

```
with
```

If you are into the subject of garbage collectors, you may want to read Thomas Perl’s paper [“Python Garbage Collector Implementations: CPython, PyPy and GaS”](https://fpy.li/6-17), from which I learned the bit about the safety of the `open().write()` in CPython.

Parameter Passing: Call by Sharing

A popular way of explaining how parameter passing works in Python is the phrase: “Parameters are passed by value, but the values are references.” This is not wrong, but causes confusion because the most common parameter passing modes in older languages are _call by value_ (the function gets a copy of the argument) and _call by reference_ (the function gets a pointer to the argument). In Python, the function gets a copy of the arguments, but the arguments are always references. So the value of the referenced objects may be changed, if they are mutable, but their identity cannot. Also, because the function gets a copy of the reference in an argument, rebinding it in the function body has no effect outside of the function. I adopted the term _call by sharing_ after reading up on the subject in _Programming Language Pragmatics_, 3rd ed., by Michael L. Scott (Morgan Kaufmann), section “8.3.1: Parameter Modes.”

[^1]: .

[^2]:  In contrast, flat sequences like `str`, `bytes`, and `array.array` don’t contain references but directly hold their contents—characters, bytes, and numbers—in contiguous memory.

[^3]:  in the English Wikipedia.

[^4]: ` in the Python console to read: “If the argument is a tuple, the return value is the same object.” I thought I knew everything about tuples before writing this book.

[^5]:  The harmless lie of having the `copy` method not copying anything is justified by interface compatibility: it makes `frozenset` more compatible with `set`. Anyway, it makes no difference to the end user whether two identical immutable objects are the same or are copies.

[^6]:  A terrible use for this information would be to ask about it when interviewing candidates or authoring questions for “certification” exams. There are countless more important and useful facts to check for Python knowledge.

[^7]:  Actually the type of an object may be changed by merely assigning a different class to its `__class__` attribute, but that is pure evil and I regret writing this footnote.