# Python in the Multicore World

Consider this citation from the widely quoted article [“The Free Lunch Is Over: A Fundamental Turn Toward Concurrency in Software” by Herb Sutter](https://fpy.li/19-29):

> The major processor manufacturers and architectures, from Intel and AMD to Sparc and PowerPC, have run out of room with most of their traditional approaches to boosting CPU performance. Instead of driving clock speeds and straight-line instruction throughput ever higher, they are instead turning en masse to hyper-threading and multicore architectures. March 2005. [Available online].

What Sutter calls the “free lunch” was the trend of software getting faster with no additional developer effort because CPUs were executing sequential code faster, year after year. Since 2004, that is no longer true: clock speeds and execution optimizations reached a plateau, and now any significant increase in performance must come from leveraging multiple cores or hyperthreading, advances that only benefit code that is written for concurrent execution.

Python’s story started in the early 1990s, when CPUs were still getting exponentially faster at sequential code execution. There was no talk about multicore CPUs except in supercomputers back then. At the time, the decision to have a GIL was a no-brainer. The GIL makes the interpreter faster when running on a single core, and its implementation simpler.[^18] The GIL also makes it easier to write simple extensions through the Python/C API.

###### Note

I just wrote “simple extensions” because an extension does not need to deal with the GIL at all. A function written in C or Fortran may be hundreds of times faster than the equivalent in Python.[^19] Therefore the added complexity of releasing the GIL to leverage multicore CPUs may not be needed in many cases. So we can thank the GIL for many extensions available for Python—and that is certainly one of the key reasons why the language is so popular today.

Despite the GIL, Python is thriving in applications that require concurrent or parallel execution, thanks to libraries and software architectures that work around the limitations of CPython.

Now let’s discuss how Python is used in system administration, data science, and server-side application development in the multicore, distributed computing world of 2021.