## Case-Insensitive Mappings

[Example 14-8](#ex_uppermixin) shows `UpperCaseMixin`, a class designed to provide case-insensitive access to mappings with string keys, by uppercasing those keys when they are added or looked up.

##### Example 14-8. uppermixin.py: `UpperCaseMixin` supports case-insensitive mappings

`import` `collections`
`def` `_upper``(``key``)``:`  [![^1]
    `try``:`
        `return` `key``.``upper``(``)`
    `except` `AttributeError``:`
        `return` `key`
`class` `UpperCaseMixin``:`  [![^2]
    `def` `__setitem__``(``self``,` `key``,` `item``)``:`
        `super``(``)``.``__setitem__``(``_upper``(``key``)``,` `item``)`
    `def` `__getitem__``(``self``,` `key``)``:`
        `return` `super``(``)``.``__getitem__``(``_upper``(``key``)``)`
    `def` `get``(``self``,` `key``,` `default``=``None``)``:`
        `return` `super``(``)``.``get``(``_upper``(``key``)``,` `default``)`
    `def` `__contains__``(``self``,` `key``)``:`
        `return` `super``(``)``.``__contains__``(``_upper``(``key``)``)`

[![^1]

This helper function takes a `key` of any type, and tries to return `key.upper()`; if that fails, it returns the `key` unchanged.

[![^2]

The mixin implements four essential methods of mappings, always calling `super()`, with the `key` uppercased, if possible.

Since every method ot `UpperCaseMixin` calls `super()`, this mixin depends on a sibling class that implements or inherits methods with the same signature. To make its contribution, a mixin usually needs to appear before other classes in the MRO of a subclass that uses it. In practice, that means mixins must appear first in the tuple of base classes in a class declaration. [Example 14-9](#ex_upperdict) shows two examples.

##### Example 14-9. uppermixin.py: two classes that use `UpperCaseMixin`

```
class
```

[![^1]

`UpperDict` needs no implementation of its own, but `UpperCaseMixin` must be the first base class, otherwise the methods from `UserDict` would be called instead.

[![^2]

`UpperCaseMixin` also works with `Counter`.

[![^3]

Instead of `pass`, it’s better to provide a docstring to satisfy the need for a body in the `class` statement syntax.

Here are some doctests from [_uppermixin.py_](https://fpy.li/14-11), for `UpperDict`:

```
    >>> d = UpperDict([('a', 'letter A'), (2, 'digit two')])
```

And a quick demonstration of `UpperCounter`:

```
    >>> c = UpperCounter('BaNanA')
```

`UpperDict` and `UpperCounter` seem almost magical, but I had to carefully study the code of `UserDict` and `Counter` to make `UpperCaseMixin` work with them.

For example, my first version of `UpperCaseMixin` did not provide the `get` method. That version worked with `UserDict` but not with `Counter`. The `UserDict` class inherits `get` from `collections.abc.Mapping`, and that `get` calls `__getitem__`, which I implemented. But keys were not uppercased when an `UpperCounter` was loaded upon `__init__`. That happened because `Counter.__init__` uses `Counter.update`, which in turn relies on the `get` method inherited from `dict`. However, the `get` method in the `dict` class does not call `__getitem__`. This is the heart of the issue discussed in [“Inconsistent Usage of __missing__ in the Standard Library”](ch03.html#inconsistent_missing). It is also a stark reminder of the brittle and puzzling nature of programs leveraging inheritance, even at a small scale.

The next section covers several examples of multiple inheritance, often featuring mixin classes.