# Chapter Summary

The main topic of this chapter was the data class builders `collections.namedtuple`, `typing.NamedTuple`, and `dataclasses.dataclass`. We saw that each generates data classes from descriptions provided as arguments to a factory function, or from `class` statements with type hints in the case of the latter two. In particular, both named tuple variants produce `tuple` subclasses, adding only the ability to access fields by name, and providing a `_fields` class attribute listing the field names as a tuple of strings.

Next we studied the main features of the three class builders side by side, including how to extract instance data as a `dict`, how to get the names and default values of fields, and how to make a new instance from an existing one.

This prompted our first look into type hints, particularly those used to annotate attributes in a `class` statement, using the notation introduced in Python 3.6 with [PEP 526—Syntax for Variable Annotations](https://fpy.li/pep526). Probably the most surprising aspect of type hints in general is the fact that they have no effect at all at runtime. Python remains a dynamic language. External tools, like Mypy, are needed to take advantage of typing information to detect errors via static analysis of the source code. After a basic overview of the syntax from PEP 526, we studied the effect of annotations in a plain class and in classes built by `typing.NamedTuple` and `@dataclass`.

Next, we covered the most commonly used features provided by `@dataclass` and the `default_factory` option of the `dataclasses.field` function. We also looked into the special pseudotype hints `typing.ClassVar` and `dataclasses.InitVar` that are important in the context of data classes. This main topic concluded with an example based on the Dublin Core Schema, which illustrated how to use `dataclasses.fields` to iterate over the attributes of a `Resource` instance in a custom `__repr__`.

Then, we warned against possible abuse of data classes defeating a basic principle of object-oriented programming: data and the functions that touch it should be together in the same class. Classes with no logic may be a sign of misplaced logic.

In the last section, we saw how pattern matching works with subjects that are instances of any class—not just classes built with the class builders presented in this chapter.