## Field Options

We’ve already seen the most basic field option: providing (or not) a default value with the type hint. The instance fields you declare will become parameters in the generated `__init__`. Python does not allow parameters without defaults after parameters with defaults, therefore after you declare a field with a default value, all remaining fields must also have default values.

Mutable default values are a common source of bugs for beginning Python developers. In function definitions, a mutable default value is easily corrupted when one invocation of the function mutates the default, changing the behavior of further invocations—an issue we’ll explore in [“Mutable Types as Parameter Defaults: Bad Idea”](ch06.html#mutable_default_parameter_sec) ([Chapter 6](ch06.html#mutability_and_references)). Class attributes are often used as default attribute values for instances, including in data classes. And `@dataclass` uses the default values in the type hints to generate parameters with defaults for `__init__`. To prevent bugs, `@dataclass` rejects the class definition in [Example 5-13](#club_wrong_ex).

##### Example 5-13. _dataclass/club_wrong.py_: this class raises `ValueError`

```
@dataclass
```

If you load the module with that `ClubMember` class, this is what you get:

$ python3 club_wrong.py
Traceback `(`most recent call last`)`:
  File `"club_wrong.py"`, line `4`, `in` <module>
    class ClubMember:
  ...several lines omitted...
ValueError: mutable default <class `'list'`> `for` field guests is not allowed:
use default_factory

The `ValueError` message explains the problem and suggests a solution: use `default_factory`. [Example 5-14](#club_ex) shows how to correct `ClubMember`.

##### Example 5-14. _dataclass/club.py_: this `ClubMember` definition works

```
from
```

In the `guests` field of [Example 5-14](#club_ex), instead of a literal list, the default value is set by calling the `dataclasses.field` function with `default_factory=list`.

The `default_factory` parameter lets you provide a function, class, or any other callable, which will be invoked with zero arguments to build a default value each time an instance of the data class is created. This way, each instance of `ClubMember` will have its own `list`—instead of all instances sharing the same `list` from the class, which is rarely what we want and is often a bug.

###### Warning

It’s good that `@dataclass` rejects class definitions with a `list` default value in a field. However, be aware that it is a partial solution that only applies to `list`, `dict`, and `set`. Other mutable values used as defaults will not be flagged by `@dataclass`. It’s up to you to understand the problem and remember to use a default factory to set mutable default values.

If you browse the [`dataclasses`](https://fpy.li/5-9) module documentation, you’ll see a `list` field defined with a novel syntax, as in [Example 5-15](#club_generic_ex).

##### Example 5-15. _dataclass/club_generic.py_: this `ClubMember` definition is more precise

```
from
```

[![^1]

`list[str]` means “a list of str.”

The new syntax `list[str]` is a parameterized generic type: since Python 3.9, the `list` built-in accepts that bracket notation to specify the type of the list items.

###### Warning

Prior to Python 3.9, the built-in collections did not support generic type notation. As a temporary workaround, there are corresponding collection types in the `typing` module. If you need a parameterized `list` type hint in Python 3.8 or earlier, you must import the `List` type from `typing` and use it: `List[str]`. For more about this issue, see [“Legacy Support and Deprecated Collection Types”](ch08.html#legacy_deprecated_typing_box).

We’ll cover generics in [Chapter 8](ch08.html#type_hints_in_def_ch). For now, note that Examples [5-14](#club_ex) and [5-15](#club_generic_ex) are both correct, and the Mypy type checker does not complain about either of those class definitions.

The difference is that `guests: list` means that `guests` can be a `list` of objects of any kind, while `guests: list[str]` says that `guests` must be a `list` in which every item is a `str`. This will allow the type checker to find (some) bugs in code that puts invalid items in the list, or that read items from it.

The `default_factory` is likely to be the most common option of the `field` function, but there are several others, listed in [Table 5-3](#field_options_tbl).

Table 5-3. Keyword arguments accepted by the `field` function
|Option|Meaning|Default|
|---|---|---|
|`default`|Default value for field|`_MISSING_TYPE`[a](ch05.html#idm46582453966752)|
|`default_factory`|0-parameter function used to produce a default|`_MISSING_TYPE`|
|`init`|Include field in parameters to `__init__`|`True`|
|`repr`|Include field in `__repr__`|`True`|
|`compare`|Use field in comparison methods `__eq__`, `__lt__`, etc.|`True`|
|`hash`|Include field in `__hash__` calculation|`None`[b](ch05.html#idm46582453951136)|
|`metadata`|Mapping with user-defined data; ignored by the `@dataclass`|`None`|
|[a](ch05.html#idm46582453966752-marker) `dataclass._MISSING_TYPE` is a sentinel value indicating the option was not provided. It exists so we can set `None` as an actual default value, a common use case.<br><br>[b](ch05.html#idm46582453951136-marker) The option `hash=None` means the field will be used in `__hash__` only if `compare=True`.|   |   |

The `default` option exists because the `field` call takes the place of the default value in the field annotation. If you want to create an `athlete` field with a default value of `False`, and also omit that field from the `__repr__` method, you’d write this:

```
@dataclass
```