# Chapter 14. Inheritance: For Better or for Worse

> [...] we needed a better theory about inheritance entirely (and still do). For example, inheritance and instancing (which is a kind of inheritance) muddles both pragmatics (such as factoring code to save space) and semantics (used for way too many tasks such as: specialization, generalization, speciation, etc.).
> 
> Alan Kay, “The Early History of Smalltalk”[^1]

This chapter is about inheritance and subclassing. I will assume a basic understanding of these concepts, which you may know from reading [_The Python Tutorial_](https://fpy.li/14-2) or from experience with another mainstream object-oriented language, such as Java, C#, or C++. Here we’ll focus on four characteristics of Python:

- The `super()` function
    
- The pitfalls of subclassing from built-in types
    
- Multiple inheritance and method resolution order
    
- Mixin classes
    

Multiple inheritance is the ability of a class to have more than one base class. C++ supports it; Java and C# don’t. Many consider multiple inheritance more trouble than it’s worth. It was deliberately left out of Java after its perceived abuse in early C++ codebases.

This chapter introduces multiple inheritance for those who have never used it, and provides some guidance on how to cope with single or multiple inheritance if you must use it.

As of 2021, there is a significant backlash against overuse of inheritance in general—not only multiple inheritance—because superclasses and subclasses are tightly coupled. Tight coupling means that changes to one part of the program may have unexpected and far-reaching effects in other parts, making systems brittle and hard to understand.

However, we have to maintain existing systems designed with complex class hierarchies, or use frameworks that force us to use inheritance—even multiple inheritance sometimes.

I will illustrate practical uses of multiple inheritance with the standard library, the Django web framework, and the Tkinter GUI toolkit.