# The super() Function

Consistent use the of the `super()` built-in function is essential for maintainable object-oriented Python programs.

When a subclass overrides a method of a superclass, the overriding method usually needs to call the corresponding method of the superclass. Here’s the recommended way to do it, from an example in the _collections_ module documentation, section [“OrderedDict Examples and Recipes”](https://fpy.li/14-3):[^2]

```
class
```

To do its job, `LastUpdatedOrderedDict` overrides `__setitem__` to:

1. Use `super().__setitem__` to call that method on the superclass, to let it insert or update the key/value pair.
    
2. Call `self.move_to_end` to ensure the updated `key` is in the last position.
    

Invoking an overridden `__init__` method is particularly important to allow superclasses to do their part in initializing the instance.

###### Tip

If you learned object-oriented programming in Java, you may recall that a Java constructor method automatically calls the no-argument constructor of the superclass. Python doesn’t do this. You must get used to writing this pattern:

    `def` `__init__``(``self``,` `a``,` `b``)` `:`
        `super``()``.``__init__``(``a``,` `b``)`
        `...`  `# more initialization code`

You may have seen code that doesn’t use `super()`, but instead calls the method directly on the superclass, like this:

```
class
```

This alternative works in this particular case, but is not recommended for two reasons. First, it hardcodes the base class. The name `OrderedDict` appears in the `class` statement and also inside `__setitem__`. If in the future someone changes the `class` statement to change the base class or add another one, they may forget to update the body of `__setitem__`, introducing a bug.

The second reason is that `super` implements logic to handle class hierarchies with multiple inheritance. We’ll come back to that in [“Multiple Inheritance and Method Resolution Order”](#mro_section). To conclude this refresher about `super`, it is useful to review how we had to call it in Python 2, because the old signature with two arguments is revealing:

```
class
```

Both arguments of `super` are now optional. The Python 3 bytecode compiler automatically provides them by inspecting the surrounding context when `super()` is invoked in a method. The arguments are:

`type`

The start of the search path for the superclass implementing the desired method. By default, it is the class that owns the method where the `super()` call appears.

`object_or_type`

The object (for instance method calls) or class (for class method calls) to be the receiver of the method call. By default, it is `self` if the `super()` call happens in an instance method.

Whether you or the compiler provides those arguments, the `super()` call returns a dynamic proxy object that finds a method (such as `__setitem__` in the example) in a superclass of the `type` parameter, and binds it to the `object_or_type`, so that we don’t need to pass the receiver (`self`) explicitly when invoking the method.

In Python 3, you can still explicitly provide the first and second arguments to `super()`.[^3] But they are needed only in special cases, such as skipping over part of the MRO for testing or debugging, or for working around undesired behavior in a superclass.

Now let’s discuss the caveats when subclassing built-in types.