# Subclassing Built-In Types Is Tricky

It was not possible to subclass built-in types such as `list` or `dict` in the earliest versions of Python. Since Python 2.2, it’s possible, but there is a major caveat: the code of the built-ins (written in C) usually does not call methods overridden by user-defined classes. A good short description of the problem is in the documentation for PyPy, in the “Differences between PyPy and CPython” section, [“Subclasses of built-in types”](https://fpy.li/pypydif):

> Officially, CPython has no rule at all for when exactly overridden method of subclasses of built-in types get implicitly called or not. As an approximation, these methods are never called by other built-in methods of the same object. For example, an overridden `__getitem__()` in a subclass of `dict` will not be called by e.g. the built-in `get()` method.

[Example 14-1](#ex_doppeldict) illustrates the problem.

##### Example 14-1. Our `__setitem__` override is ignored by the `__init__` and `__update__` methods of the built-in `dict`

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`DoppelDict.__setitem__` duplicates values when storing (for no good reason, just to have a visible effect). It works by delegating to the superclass.

[![^2]

The `__init__` method inherited from `dict` clearly ignored that `__setitem__` was overridden: the value of `'one'` is not duplicated.

[![^3]

The `[]` operator calls our `__setitem__` and works as expected: `'two'` maps to the duplicated value `[2, 2]`.

[![^4]

The `update` method from `dict` does not use our version of `__setitem__` either: the value of `'three'` was not duplicated.

This built-in behavior is a violation of a basic rule of object-oriented programming: the search for methods should always start from the class of the receiver (`self`), even when the call happens inside a method implemented in a superclass. This is what is called “late binding,” which Alan Kay—of Smalltalk fame—considers a key feature of object-oriented programming: in any call of the form `x.method()`, the exact method to be called must be determined at runtime, based on the class of the receiver `x`.[^4].

The problem is not limited to calls within an instance—whether `self.get()` calls `self.__getitem__()`—but also happens with overridden methods of other classes that should be called by the built-in methods. [Example 14-2](#ex_other_subclass) is adapted from the [PyPy documentation](https://fpy.li/14-5).

##### Example 14-2. The `__getitem__` of `AnswerDict` is bypassed by `dict.update`

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

`AnswerDict.__getitem__` always returns `42`, no matter what the key.

[![^2]

`ad` is an `AnswerDict` loaded with the key-value pair `('a', 'foo')`.

[![^3]

`ad['a']` returns `42`, as expected.

[![^4]

`d` is an instance of plain `dict`, which we update with `ad`.

[![^5]

The `dict.update` method ignored our `AnswerDict.__getitem__`.

###### Warning

Subclassing built-in types like `dict` or `list` or `str` directly is error-prone because the built-in methods mostly ignore user-defined overrides. Instead of subclassing the built-ins, derive your classes from the [`collections`](https://fpy.li/14-6) module using `UserDict`, `UserList`, and `UserString`, which are designed to be easily extended.

If you subclass `collections.UserDict` instead of `dict`, the issues exposed in Examples [14-1](#ex_doppeldict) and [14-2](#ex_other_subclass) are both fixed. See [Example 14-3](#ex_userdict_ok).

##### Example 14-3. `DoppelDict2` and `AnswerDict2` work as expected because they extend `UserDict` and not `dict`

```
>>> 
```

As an experiment to measure the extra work required to subclass a built-in, I rewrote the `StrKeyDict` class from [Example 3-9](ch03.html#ex_strkeydict) to subclass `dict` instead of `UserDict`. In order to make it pass the same suite of tests, I had to implement `__init__`, `get`, and `update` because the versions inherited from `dict` refused to cooperate with the overridden `__missing__`, `__contains__`, and `__setitem__`. The `UserDict` subclass from [Example 3-9](ch03.html#ex_strkeydict) has 16 lines, while the experimental `dict` subclass ended up with 33 lines.[^5]

To be clear: this section covered an issue that applies only to method delegation within the C language code of the built-in types, and only affects classes derived directly from those types. If you subclass a base class coded in Python, such as `UserDict` or `MutableMapping`, you will not be troubled by this.[^6]

Now let’s focus on an issue that arises with multiple inheritance: if a class has two superclasses, how does Python decide which attribute to use when we call `super().attr`, but both superclasses have an attribute with that name?