## String Representation

The `__repr__` special method is called by the `repr` built-in to get the string representation of the object for inspection. Without a custom `__repr__`, Python’s console would display a `Vector` instance `<Vector object at 0x10e100070>`.

The interactive console and debugger call `repr` on the results of the expressions evaluated, as does the `%r` placeholder in classic formatting with the `%` operator, and the `!r` conversion field in the new [format string syntax](https://fpy.li/1-4) used in _f-strings_ the `str.format` method.

Note that the _f-string_ in our `__repr__` uses `!r` to get the standard representation of the attributes to be displayed. This is good practice, because it shows the crucial difference between `Vector(1, 2)` and `Vector('1', '2')`—the latter would not work in the context of this example, because the constructor’s arguments should be numbers, not `str`.

The string returned by `__repr__` should be unambiguous and, if possible, match the source code necessary to re-create the represented object. That is why our `Vector` representation looks like calling the constructor of the class (e.g., `Vector(3, 4)`).

In contrast, `__str__` is called by the `str()` built-in and implicitly used by the `print` function. It should return a string suitable for display to end users.

Sometimes same string returned by `__repr__` is user-friendly, and you don’t need to code `__str__` because the implementation inherited from the `object` class calls `__repr__` as a fallback. [Example 5-2](ch05.html#coord_tuple_ex) is one of several examples in this book with a custom `__str__`.

###### Tip

Programmers with prior experience in languages with a `toString` method tend to implement `__str__` and not `__repr__`. If you only implement one of these special methods in Python, choose `__repr__`.

[“What is the difference between `__str__` and `__repr__` in Python?”](https://fpy.li/1-5) is a Stack Overflow question with excellent contributions from Pythonistas Alex Martelli and Martijn Pieters.