## Boolean Value of a Custom Type

Although Python has a `bool` type, it accepts any object in a Boolean context, such as the expression controlling an `if` or `while` statement, or as operands to `and`, `or`, and `not`. To determine whether a value `x` is _truthy_ or _falsy_, Python applies `bool(x)`, which returns either `True` or `False`.

By default, instances of user-defined classes are considered truthy, unless either `__bool__` or `__len__` is implemented. Basically, `bool(x)` calls `x.__bool__()` and uses the result. If `__bool__` is not implemented, Python tries to invoke `x.__len__()`, and if that returns zero, `bool` returns `False`. Otherwise `bool` returns `True`.

Our implementation of `__bool__` is conceptually simple: it returns `False` if the magnitude of the vector is zero, `True` otherwise. We convert the magnitude to a Boolean using `bool(abs(self))` because `__bool__` is expected to return a Boolean. Outside of `__bool__` methods, it is rarely necessary to call `bool()` explicitly, because any object can be used in a Boolean context.

Note how the special method `__bool__` allows your objects to follow the truth value testing rules defined in the [“Built-in Types” chapter](https://fpy.li/1-6) of _The Python Standard Library_ documentation.

###### Note

A faster implementation of `Vector.__bool__` is this:

    `def` `__bool__``(``self``):`
        `return` `bool``(``self``.``x` `or` `self``.``y``)`

This is harder to read, but avoids the trip through `abs`, `__abs__`, the squares, and square root. The explicit conversion to `bool` is needed because `__bool__` must return a Boolean, and `or` returns either operand as is: `x or y` evaluates to `x` if that is truthy, otherwise the result is `y`, whatever that is.