## Subclassing an ABC

Given the `Tombola` ABC, we’ll now develop two concrete subclasses that satisfy its interface. These classes were pictured in [Figure 13-5](#tombola_uml), along with the virtual subclass to be discussed in the next section.

The `BingoCage` class in [Example 13-9](#ex_tombola_bingo) is a variation of [Example 7-8](ch07.html#ex_bingo_callable) using a better randomizer. This `BingoCage` implements the required abstract methods `load` and `pick`.

##### Example 13-9. bingo.py: `BingoCage` is a concrete subclass of `Tombola`

```
import
```

[![^1]

This `BingoCage` class explicitly extends `Tombola`.

[![^2]

Pretend we’ll use this for online gaming. `random.SystemRandom` implements the `random` API on top of the `os.urandom(…)` function, which provides random bytes “suitable for cryptographic use,” according to the [`os` module docs](https://fpy.li/13-21).

[![^3]

Delegate initial loading to the `.load(…)` method.

[![^4]

Instead of the plain `random.shuffle()` function, we use the `.shuffle()` method of our `SystemRandom` instance.

[![^5]

`pick` is implemented as in [Example 7-8](ch07.html#ex_bingo_callable).

[![^6]

`__call__` is also from [Example 7-8](ch07.html#ex_bingo_callable). It’s not needed to satisfy the `Tombola` interface, but there’s no harm in adding extra methods.

`BingoCage` inherits the expensive `loaded` and the silly `inspect` methods from `Tombola`. Both could be overridden with much faster one-liners, as in [Example 13-10](#ex_lotto). The point is: we can be lazy and just inherit the suboptimal concrete methods from an ABC. The methods inherited from `Tombola` are not as fast as they could be for `BingoCage`, but they do provide correct results for any `Tombola` subclass that correctly implements `pick` and `load`.

[Example 13-10](#ex_lotto) shows a very different but equally valid implementation of the `Tombola` interface. Instead of shuffling the “balls” and popping the last, `LottoBlower` pops from a random position.

##### Example 13-10. lotto.py: `LottoBlower` is a concrete subclass that overrides the `inspect` and `loaded` methods from `Tombola`

```
import
```

[![^1]

The initializer accepts any iterable: the argument is used to build a list.

[![^2]

The `random.randrange(…)` function raises `ValueError` if the range is empty, so we catch that and throw `LookupError` instead, to be compatible with `Tombola`.

[![^3]

Otherwise the randomly selected item is popped from `self._balls`.

[![^4]

Override `loaded` to avoid calling `inspect` (as `Tombola.loaded` does in [Example 13-7](#ex_tombola_abc)). We can make it faster by working with `self._balls` directly—no need to build a whole new `tuple`.

[![^5]

Override `inspect` with a one-liner.

[Example 13-10](#ex_lotto) illustrates an idiom worth mentioning: in `__init__`, `self._balls` stores `list(iterable)` and not just a reference to `iterable` (i.e., we did not merely assign `self._balls = iterable`, aliasing the argument). As mentioned in [“Defensive Programming and ‘Fail Fast’”](#defensive_duck_prog_sec), this makes our `LottoBlower` flexible because the `iterable` argument may be any iterable type. At the same time, we make sure to store its items in a `list` so we can `pop` items. And even if we always get lists as the `iterable` argument, `list(iterable)` produces a copy of the argument, which is a good practice considering we will be removing items from it and the client might not expect that the provided list will be changed.[^13]

We now come to the crucial dynamic feature of goose typing: declaring virtual subclasses with the `register` method.