## Structural Typing with ABCs

ABCs are mostly used with nominal typing. When a class `Sub` explicitly inherits from `AnABC`, or is registered with `AnABC`, the name of `AnABC` is linked to the `Sub` class—and that’s how at runtime, `issubclass(AnABC, Sub)` returns `True`.

In contrast, structural typing is about looking at the structure of an object’s public interface to determine its type: an object is _consistent-with_ a type if it implements the methods defined in the type.[^16] Dynamic and static duck typing are two approaches to structural typing.

It turns out that some ABCs also support structural typing. In his essay, [“Waterfowl and ABCs”](#waterfowl_essay), Alex shows that a class can be recognized as a subclass of an ABC even without registration. Here is his example again, with an added test using `issubclass`:

```
>>> 
```

Class `Struggle` is considered a subclass of `abc.Sized` by the `issubclass` function (and, consequently, by `isinstance` as well) because `abc.Sized` implements a special class method named `__subclasshook__`.

The `__subclasshook__` for `Sized` checks whether the class argument has an attribute named `__len__`. If it does, then it is considered a virtual subclass of `Sized`. See [Example 13-12](#sized_source_code).

##### Example 13-12. Definition of `Sized` from the source code of [Lib/_collections_abc.py](https://fpy.li/13-25)

```
class
```

[![^1]

If there is an attribute named `__len__` in the `__dict__` of any class listed in `C.__mro__` (i.e., `C` and its superclasses)…

[![^2]

…return `True`, signaling that `C` is a virtual subclass of `Sized`.

[![^3]

Otherwise return `NotImplemented` to let the subclass check proceed.

###### Note

If you are interested in the details of the subclass check, see the source code for the `ABCMeta.__subclasscheck__` method in Python 3.6: [_Lib/abc.py_](https://fpy.li/13-26). Beware: it has lots of ifs and two recursive calls. In Python 3.7, Ivan Levkivskyi and Inada Naoki rewrote in C most of the logic for the `abc` module, for better performance. See [Python issue #31333](https://fpy.li/13-27). The current implementation of `ABCMeta.__subclasscheck__` simply calls `_abc_subclasscheck`. The relevant C source code is in [_cpython/Modules/_abc.c#L605_](https://fpy.li/13-28).

That’s how `__subclasshook__` allows ABCs to support structural typing. You can formalize an interface with an ABC, you can make `isinstance` checks against that ABC, and still have a completely unrelated class pass an `issubclass` check because it implements a certain method (or because it does whatever it takes to convince a `__subclasshook__` to vouch for it).

Is it a good idea to implement `__subclasshook__` in our own ABCs? Probably not. All the implementations of `__subclasshook__` I’ve seen in the Python source code are in ABCs like `Sized` that declare just one special method, and they simply check for that special method name. Given their “special” status, you can be pretty sure that any method named `__len__` does what you expect. But even in the realm of special methods and fundamental ABCs, it can be risky to make such assumptions. For example, mappings implement `__len__`, `__getitem__`, and `__iter__`, but they are rightly not considered subtypes of `Sequence`, because you can’t retrieve items using integer offsets or slices. That’s why the [`abc.Sequence`](https://fpy.li/13-29) class does not implement `__subclasshook__`.

For ABCs that you and I may write, a `__subclasshook__` would be even less dependable. I am not ready to believe that any class named `Spam` that implements or inherits `load`, `pick`, `inspect`, and `loaded` is guaranteed to behave as a `Tombola`. It’s better to let the programmer affirm it by subclassing `Spam` from `Tombola`, or registering it with `Tombola.register(Spam)`. Of course, your `__subclasshook__` could also check method signatures and other features, but I just don’t think it’s worthwhile.