# The Nine Flavors of Callable Objects

The call operator `()` may be applied to other objects besides functions. To determine whether an object is callable, use the `callable()` built-in function. As of Python 3.9, the [data model documentation](https://fpy.li/7-6) lists nine callable types:

User-defined functions

Created with `def` statements or `lambda` expressions.

Built-in functions

A function implemented in C (for CPython), like `len` or `time.strftime`.

Built-in methods

Methods implemented in C, like `dict.get`.

Methods

Functions defined in the body of a class.

Classes

When invoked, a class runs its `__new__` method to create an instance, then `__init__` to initialize it, and finally the instance is returned to the caller. Because there is no `new` operator in Python, calling a class is like calling a function.[^2]

Class instances

If a class defines a `__call__` method, then its instances may be invoked as functions—that’s the subject of the next section.

Generator functions

Functions or methods that use the `yield` keyword in their body. When called, they return a generator object.

Native coroutine functions

Functions or methods defined with `async def`. When called, they return a coroutine object. Added in Python 3.5.

Asynchronous generator functions

Functions or methods defined with `async def` that have `yield` in their body. When called, they return an asynchronous generator for use with `async for`. Added in Python 3.6.

Generators, native coroutines, and asynchronous generator functions are unlike other callables in that their return values are never application data, but objects that require further processing to yield application data or perform useful work. Generator functions return iterators. Both are covered in [Chapter 17](ch17.html#iterables2generators). Native coroutine functions and asynchronous generator functions return objects that only work with the help of an asynchronous programming framework, such as _asyncio_. They are the subject of [Chapter 21](ch21.html#async_ch).

###### Tip

Given the variety of existing callable types in Python, the safest way to determine whether an object is callable is to use the `callable()` built-in:

>>> abs, str, 'Ni!'
(<built-in function abs>, <class 'str'>, 'Ni!')
>>> [callable(obj) for obj in (abs, str, 'Ni!')]
[True, True, False]

We now move on to building class instances that work as callable objects.