# User-Defined Callable Types

Not only are Python functions real objects, but arbitrary Python objects may also be made to behave like functions. Implementing a `__call__` instance method is all it takes.

[Example 7-8](#ex_bingo_callable) implements a `BingoCage` class. An instance is built from any iterable, and stores an internal `list` of items, in random order. Calling the instance pops an item.[^3]

##### Example 7-8. bingocall.py: A `BingoCage` does one thing: picks items from a shuffled list

```
import
```

[![^1]

`__init__` accepts any iterable; building a local copy prevents unexpected side effects on any `list` passed as an argument.

[![^2]

`shuffle` is guaranteed to work because `self._items` is a `list`.

[![^3]

The main method.

[![^4]

Raise exception with custom message if `self._items` is empty.

[![^5]

Shortcut to `bingo.pick()`: `bingo()`.

Here is a simple demo of [Example 7-8](#ex_bingo_callable). Note how a `bingo` instance can be invoked as a function, and the `callable()` built-in recognizes it as a callable object:

```
>>>
```

A class implementing `__call__` is an easy way to create function-like objects that have some internal state that must be kept across invocations, like the remaining items in the `BingoCage`. Another good use case for `__call__` is implementing decorators. Decorators must be callable, and it is sometimes convenient to “remember” something between calls of the decorator (e.g., for memoization—caching the results of expensive computations for later use) or to split a complex implementation into separate methods.

The functional approach to creating functions with internal state is to use closures. Closures, as well as decorators, are the subject of [Chapter 9](ch09.html#closures_and_decorators).

Now let’s explore the powerful syntax Python offers to declare function parameters and pass arguments into them.