## A Sequential Download Script

[Example 20-2](#flags_module_ex) contains the implementation of _flags.py_, the first script we ran in [Example 20-1](#ex_flags_sample_runs). It’s not very interesting, but we’ll reuse most of its code and settings to implement the concurrent scripts, so it deserves some attention.

###### Note

For clarity, there is no error handling in [Example 20-2](#flags_module_ex). We will deal with exceptions later, but here I want to focus on the basic structure of the code, to make it easier to contrast this script with the concurrent ones.

##### Example 20-2. flags.py: sequential download script; some functions will be reused by the other scripts

```
import
```

[![^1]

Import the `httpx` library. It’s not part of the standard library, so by convention the import goes after the standard library modules and a blank line.

[![^2]

List of the ISO 3166 country codes for the 20 most populous countries in order of decreasing population.

[![^3]

The directory with the flag 0-Assets/Epubook/Fluent%20Python%20Clear,%20Concise,%20and%20Effective%20Programming/images.[^4]

[![^4]

Local directory where the 0-Assets/Epubook/Fluent%20Python%20Clear,%20Concise,%20and%20Effective%20Programming/images are saved.

[![^5]

Save the `img` bytes to `filename` in the `DEST_DIR`.

[![^6]

Given a country code, build the URL and download the image, returning the binary contents of the response.

[![^7]

It’s good practice to add a sensible timeout to network operations, to avoid blocking for several minutes for no good reason.

[![^8]

By default, _HTTPX_ does not follow redirects.[^5]

[![^9]

There’s no error handling in this script, but this method raises an exception if the HTTP status is not in the 2XX range—highly recommended to avoid silent failures.

[![^10]

`download_many` is the key function to compare with the concurrent implementations.

[![^11]

Loop over the list of country codes in alphabetical order, to make it easy to see that the ordering is preserved in the output; return the number of country codes downloaded.

[![^12]

Display one country code at a time in the same line so we can see progress as each download happens. The `end=' '` argument replaces the usual line break at the end of each line printed with a space character, so all country codes are displayed progressively in the same line. The `flush=True` argument is needed because, by default, Python output is line buffered, meaning that Python only displays printed characters after a line break.

[![^13]

`main` must be called with the function that will make the downloads; that way, we can use `main` as a library function with other implementations of `download_many` in the `threadpool` and `ascyncio` examples.

[![^14]

Create `DEST_DIR` if needed; don’t raise an error if the directory exists.

[![^15]

Record and report the elapsed time after running the `downloader` function.

[![^16]

Call `main` with the `download_many` function.

###### Tip

The [_HTTPX_](https://fpy.li/httpx) library is inspired by the Pythonic [_requests_](https://fpy.li/20-5) package, but is built on a more modern foundation. Crucially, _HTTPX_ provides synchronous and asynchronous APIs, so we can use it in all HTTP client examples in this chapter and the next. Python’s standard library provides the `urllib.request` module, but its API is synchronous only, and is not user friendly.

There’s really nothing new to _flags.py_. It serves as a baseline for comparing the other scripts, and I used it as a library to avoid redundant code when implementing them. Now let’s see a reimplementation using `concurrent.futures`.