## Where Are the Futures?

Futures are core components of `concurrent.futures` and of `asyncio`, but as users of these libraries we sometimes don’t see them. [Example 20-3](#flags_threadpool_ex) depends on futures behind the scenes, but the code I wrote does not touch them directly. This section is an overview of futures, with an example that shows them in action.

Since Python 3.4, there are two classes named `Future` in the standard library: `concurrent.futures.Future` and `asyncio.Future`. They serve the same purpose: an instance of either `Future` class represents a deferred computation that may or may not have completed. This is somewhat similar to the `Deferred` class in Twisted, the `Future` class in Tornado, and `Promise` in modern JavaScript.

Futures encapsulate pending operations so that we can put them in queues, check whether they are done, and retrieve results (or exceptions) when they become available.

An important thing to know about futures is that you and I should not create them: they are meant to be instantiated exclusively by the concurrency framework, be it `concurrent.futures` or `asyncio`. Here is why: a `Future` represents something that will eventually run, therefore it must be scheduled to run, and that’s the job of the framework. In particular, `concurrent.futures.Future` instances are created only as the result of submitting a callable for execution with a `concurrent.futures.Executor` subclass. For example, the `Executor.submit()` method takes a callable, schedules it to run, and returns a `Future`.

Application code is not supposed to change the state of a future: the concurrency framework changes the state of a future when the computation it represents is done, and we can’t control when that happens.

Both types of `Future` have a `.done()` method that is nonblocking and returns a Boolean that tells you whether the callable wrapped by that future has executed or not. However, instead of repeatedly asking whether a future is done, client code usually asks to be notified. That’s why both `Future` classes have an `.add_done_callback()` method: you give it a callable, and the callable will be invoked with the future as the single argument when the future is done. Be aware that the callback callable will run in the same worker thread or process that ran the function wrapped in the future.

There is also a `.result()` method, which works the same in both classes when the future is done: it returns the result of the callable, or re-raises whatever exception might have been thrown when the callable was executed. However, when the future is not done, the behavior of the `result` method is very different between the two flavors of `Future`. In a `concurrency.futures.Future` instance, invoking `f.result()` will block the caller’s thread until the result is ready. An optional `timeout` argument can be passed, and if the future is not done in the specified time, the `result` method raises `TimeoutError`. The `asyncio.Future.result` method does not support timeout, and `await` is the preferred way to get the result of futures in `asyncio`—but `await` doesn’t work with `concurrency.futures.Future` instances.

Several functions in both libraries return futures; others use them in their implementation in a way that is transparent to the user. An example of the latter is the `Executor.map` we saw in [Example 20-3](#flags_threadpool_ex): it returns an iterator in which `__next__` calls the `result` method of each future, so we get the results of the futures, and not the futures themselves.

To get a practical look at futures, we can rewrite [Example 20-3](#flags_threadpool_ex) to use the [`concurrent.futures.as_completed`](https://fpy.li/20-7) function, which takes an iterable of futures and returns an iterator that yields futures as they are done.

Using `futures.as_completed` requires changes to the `download_many` function only. The higher-level `executor.map` call is replaced by two `for` loops: one to create and schedule the futures, the other to retrieve their results. While we are at it, we’ll add a few `print` calls to display each future before and after it’s done. [Example 20-4](#flags_threadpool_futures_ex) shows the code for a new `download_many` function. The code for `download_many` grew from 5 to 17 lines, but now we get to inspect the mysterious futures. The remaining functions are the same as in [Example 20-3](#flags_threadpool_ex).

##### Example 20-4. flags_threadpool_futures.py: replacing `executor.map` with `executor.submit` and `futures.as_completed` in the `download_many` function

```
def
```

[![^1]

For this demonstration, use only the top five most populous countries.

[![^2]

Set `max_workers` to `3` so we can see pending futures in the output.

[![^3]

Iterate over country codes alphabetically, to make it clear that results will arrive out of order.

[![^4]

`executor.submit` schedules the callable to be executed, and returns a `future` representing this pending operation.

[![^5]

Store each `future` so we can later retrieve them with `as_completed`.

[![^6]

Display a message with the country code and the respective `future`.

[![^7]

`as_completed` yields futures as they are completed.

[![^8]

Get the result of this `future`.

[![^9]

Display the `future` and its result.

Note that the `future.result()` call will never block in this example because the `future` is coming out of `as_completed`. [Example 20-5](#flags_threadpool_futures_run) shows the output of one run of [Example 20-4](#flags_threadpool_futures_ex).

##### Example 20-5. Output of flags_threadpool_futures.py

```
$ python3 flags_threadpool_futures.py
Scheduled for BR: <Future at 0x100791518 state=running>  
```

[![^1]

The futures are scheduled in alphabetical order; the `repr()` of a future shows its state: the first three are `running`, because there are three worker threads.

[![^2]

The last two futures are `pending`, waiting for worker threads.

[![^3]

The first `CN` here is the output of `download_one` in a worker thread; the rest of the line is the output of `download_many`.

[![^4]

Here, two threads output codes before `download_many` in the main thread can display the result of the first thread.

###### Tip

I recommend experimenting with _flags_threadpool_futures.py_. If you run it several times, you’ll see the order of the results varying. Increasing `max_workers` to `5` will increase the variation in the order of the results. Decreasing it to `1` will make this script run sequentially, and the order of the results will always be the order of the `submit` calls.

We saw two variants of the download script using `concurrent.futures`: one in [Example 20-3](#flags_threadpool_ex) with `ThreadPoolExecutor.map` and one in [Example 20-4](#flags_threadpool_futures_ex) with `futures.as_completed`. If you are curious about the code for _flags_asyncio.py_, you may peek at [Example 21-3](ch21.html#flags_asyncio_ex) in [Chapter 21](ch21.html#async_ch), where it is explained.

Now let’s take a brief look at a simple way to work around the GIL for CPU-bound jobs using `concurrent.futures`.