## A Nice Metaclass Example

The `MetaBunch` metaclass presented here is a variation of the last example in Chapter 4 of [_Python in a Nutshell_, 3rd ed.](https://fpy.li/pynut3), by Alex Martelli, Anna Ravenscroft, and Steve Holden, written to run on Python 2.7 and 3.5.[^14] Assuming Python 3.6 or later, I was able to further simplify the code.

First, let’s see what the `Bunch` base class provides:

```
    >>> class Point(Bunch):
```

Remember that `Checked` assigns names to the `Field` descriptors in subclasses based on class variable type hints, which do not actually become attributes on the class since they don’t have values.

`Bunch` subclasses, on the other hand, use actual class attributes with values, which then become the default values of the instance attributes. The generated `__repr__` omits the arguments for attributes that are equal to the defaults.

`MetaBunch`—the metaclass of `Bunch`—generates `__slots__` for the new class from the class attributes declared in the user’s class. This blocks the instantiation and later assignment of undeclared attributes:

```
    >>> Point(x=1, y=2, z=3)
```

Now let’s dive into the elegant code of `MetaBunch` in [Example 24-15](#metabunch_ex).

##### Example 24-15. metabunch/from3.6/bunch.py: `MetaBunch` metaclass and `Bunch` class

```
class
```

[![^1]

To create a new metaclass, inherit from `type`.

[![^2]

`__new__` works as a class method, but the class is a metaclass, so I like to name the first argument `meta_cls` (`mcs` is a common alternative). The remaining three arguments are the same as the three-argument signature for calling `type()` directly to create a class.

[![^3]

`defaults` will hold a mapping of attribute names and their default values.

[![^4]

This will be injected into the new class.

[![^5]

Read the `defaults` and set the corresponding instance attribute with a value popped from `kwargs` or a default.

[![^6]

If there is still any item in `kwargs`, it means there are no slots left where we can place them. We believe in _failing fast_ as best practice, so we don’t want to silently ignore extra items. A quick and effective solution is to pop one item from `kwargs` and try to set it on the instance, triggering an `AttributeError` on purpose.

[![^7]

`__repr__` returns a string that looks like a constructor call—e.g., `Point(x=3)`, omitting the keyword arguments with default values.

[![^8]

Initialize namespace for the new class.

[![^9]

Iterate over the namespace of the user’s class.

[![^10]

If a dunder `name` is found, copy the item to the new class namespace, unless it’s already there. This prevents users from overwriting `__init__`, `__repr__`, and other attributes set by Python, such as `__qualname__` and `__module__`.

[![^11]

If not a dunder `name`, append to `__slots__` and save its `value` in `defaults`.

[![^12]

Build and return the new class.

[![^13]

Provide a base class, so users don’t need to see `MetaBunch`.

`MetaBunch` works because it is able to configure `__slots__` before calling `super().__new__` to build the final class. As usual when metaprogramming, understanding the sequence of actions is key. Let’s do another evaluation time experiment, now with a metaclass.