## How a Metaclass Customizes a Class

To use a metaclass, it’s critical to understand how `__new__` works on any class. This was discussed in [“Flexible Object Creation with __new__”](ch22.html#flexible_new_sec).

The same mechanics happen at a “meta” level when a metaclass is about to create a new instance, which is a class. Consider this declaration:

```
class
```

To process that `class` statement, Python calls `MetaKlass.__new__` with these arguments:

`meta_cls`

The metaclass itself (`MetaKlass`), because `__new__` works as class method.

`cls_name`

The string `Klass`.

`bases`

The single-element tuple `(SuperKlass,)`, with more elements in the case of multiple inheritance.

`cls_dict`

A mapping like:

{x: 42, `__init__`: <function __init__ at 0x1009c4040>}

When you implement `MetaKlass.__new__`, you can inspect and change those arguments before passing them to `super().__new__`, which will eventually call `type.__new__` to create the new class object.

After `super().__new__` returns, you can also apply further processing to the newly created class before returning it to Python. Python then calls `SuperKlass.__init_subclass__`, passing the class you created, and then applies a class decorator to it, if one is present. Finally, Python binds the class object to its name in the surrounding namespace—usually the global namespace of a module, if the `class` statement was a top-level statement.

The most common processing made in a metaclass `__new__` is to add or replace items in the `cls_dict`—the mapping that represents the namespace of the class under construction. For instance, before calling `super().__new__`, you can inject methods in the class under construction by adding functions to `cls_dict`. However, note that adding methods can also be done after the class is built, which is why we were able to do it using `__init_subclass__` or a class decorator.

One attribute that you must add to the `cls_dict` before `type.__new__` runs is `__slots__`, as discussed in [“Why __init_subclass__ Cannot Configure __slots__”](#why_cannot_config_slots_sec). The `__new__` method of a metaclass is the ideal place to configure `__slots__`. The next section shows how to do that.