## str Versus bytes in os Functions

The GNU/Linux kernel is not Unicode savvy, so in the real world you may find filenames made of byte sequences that are not valid in any sensible encoding scheme, and cannot be decoded to `str`. File servers with clients using a variety of OSes are particularly prone to this problem.

In order to work around this issue, all `os` module functions that accept filenames or pathnames take arguments as `str` or `bytes`. If one such function is called with a `str` argument, the argument will be automatically converted using the codec named by `sys.getfilesystemencoding()`, and the OS response will be decoded with the same codec. This is almost always what you want, in keeping with the Unicode sandwich best practice.

But if you must deal with (and perhaps fix) filenames that cannot be handled in that way, you can pass `bytes` arguments to the `os` functions to get `bytes` return values. This feature lets you deal with any file or pathname, no matter how many gremlins you may find. See [Example 4-24](#ex_listdir1).

##### Example 4-24. `listdir` with `str` and `bytes` arguments and results

```
>>> 
```

[![^1]

The second filename is “digits-of-π.txt” (with the Greek letter pi).

[![^2]

Given a `byte` argument, `listdir` returns filenames as bytes: `b'\xcf\x80'` is the UTF-8 encoding of the Greek letter pi.

To help with manual handling of `str` or `bytes` sequences that are filenames or pathnames, the `os` module provides special encoding and decoding functions `os.fsencode(name_or_path)` and `os.fsdecode(name_or_path)`. Both of these functions accept an argument of type `str`, `bytes`, or an object implementing the `os.PathLike` interface since Python 3.6.

Unicode is a deep rabbit hole. Time to wrap up our exploration of `str` and `bytes`.