# Chapter 10. Design Patterns with First-Class Functions

> Conformity to patterns is not a measure of goodness.
> 
> Ralph Johnson, coauthor of the _Design Patterns_ classic[^1]

In software engineering, a [_design pattern_](https://fpy.li/10-1) is a general recipe for solving a common design problem. You don’t need to know design patterns to follow this chapter. I will explain the patterns used in the examples.

The use of design patterns in programming was popularized by the landmark book _Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software_ (Addison-Wesley) by Erich Gamma, Richard Helm, Ralph Johnson, and John Vlissides—a.k.a. “the Gang of Four.” The book is a catalog of 23 patterns consisting of arrangements of classes exemplified with code in C++, but assumed to be useful in other object-oriented languages as well.

Although design patterns are language independent, that does not mean every pattern applies to every language. For example, [Chapter 17](ch17.html#iterables2generators) will show that it doesn’t make sense to emulate the recipe of the [Iterator](https://fpy.li/10-2) pattern in Python, because the pattern is embedded in the language and ready to use in the form of generators—which don’t need classes to work, and require less code than the classic recipe.

The authors of _Design Patterns_ acknowledge in their introduction that the implementation language determines which patterns are relevant:

> The choice of programming language is important because it influences one’s point of view. Our patterns assume Smalltalk/C++-level language features, and that choice determines what can and cannot be implemented easily. If we assumed procedural languages, we might have included design patterns called “Inheritance,” “Encapsulation,” and “Polymorphism.” Similarly, some of our patterns are supported directly by the less common object-oriented languages. CLOS has multi-methods, for example, which lessen the need for a pattern such as Visitor.[^2]

In his 1996 presentation, [“Design Patterns in Dynamic Languages”](https://fpy.li/norvigdp), Peter Norvig states that 16 out of the 23 patterns in the original _Design Patterns_ book become either “invisible or simpler” in a dynamic language (slide 9). He’s talking about the Lisp and Dylan languages, but many of the relevant dynamic features are also present in Python. In particular, in the context of languages with first-class functions, Norvig suggests rethinking the classic patterns known as Strategy, Command, Template Method, and Visitor.

The goal of this chapter is to show how—in some cases—functions can do the same work as classes, with code that is more readable and concise. We will refactor an implementation of Strategy using functions as objects, removing a lot of boilerplate code. We’ll also discuss a similar approach to simplifying the Command pattern.