# Decorator-Enhanced Strategy Pattern

Recall that our main issue with [Example 10-6](#ex_strategy_best) is the repetition of the function names in their definitions and then in the `promos` list used by the `best_promo` function to determine the highest discount applicable. The repetition is problematic because someone may add a new promotional strategy function and forget to manually add it to the `promos` list—in which case, `best_promo` will silently ignore the new strategy, introducing a subtle bug in the system. [Example 10-9](#ex_strategy_best31) solves this problem with the technique covered in [“Registration Decorators”](ch09.html#registration_deco_sec).

##### Example 10-9. The `promos` list is filled by the `Promotion` decorator

```
Promotion
```

[![^1]

The `promos` list is a module global, and starts empty.

[![^2]

`Promotion` is a registration decorator: it returns the `promo` function unchanged, after appending it to the `promos` list.

[![^3]

No changes needed to `best_promo`, because it relies on the `promos` list.

[![^4]

Any function decorated by `@promotion` will be added to `promos`.

This solution has several advantages over the others presented before:

- The promotion strategy functions don’t have to use special names—no need for the `_promo` suffix.
    
- The `@promotion` decorator highlights the purpose of the decorated function, and also makes it easy to temporarily disable a promotion: just comment out the decorator.
    
- Promotional discount strategies may be defined in other modules, anywhere in the system, as long as the `@promotion` decorator is applied to them.
    

In the next section, we discuss Command—another design pattern that is sometimes implemented via single-method classes when plain functions would do.