# Methods Are Descriptors

A function within a class becomes a bound method when invoked on an instance because all user-defined functions have a `__get__` method, therefore they operate as descriptors when attached to a class. [Example 23-13](#descriptorkinds_demo5) demonstrates reading the `spam` method from the `Managed` class introduced in [Example 23-8](#descriptorkinds_ex).

##### Example 23-13. A method is a nonoverriding descriptor

```
>>
```

[![^1]

Reading from `obj.spam` retrieves a bound method object.

[![^2]

But reading from `Managed.spam` retrieves a function.

[![^3]

Assigning a value to `obj.spam` shadows the class attribute, rendering the `spam` method inaccessible from the `obj` instance.

Functions do not implement `__set__`, therefore they are nonoverriding descriptors, as the last line of [Example 23-13](#descriptorkinds_demo5) shows.

The other key takeaway from [Example 23-13](#descriptorkinds_demo5) is that `obj.spam` and `Managed.spam` retrieve different objects. As usual with descriptors, the `__get__` of a function returns a reference to itself when the access happens through the managed class. But when the access goes through an instance, the `__get__` of the function returns a bound method object: a callable that wraps the function and binds the managed instance (e.g., `obj`) to the first argument of the function (i.e., `self`), like the `functools.partial` function does (as seen in [“Freezing Arguments with functools.partial”](ch07.html#functools_partial_sec)). For a deeper understanding of this mechanism, take a look at [Example 23-14](#func_descriptor_ex).

##### Example 23-14. method_is_descriptor.py: a `Text` class, derived from `UserString`

```
import
```

Now let’s investigate the `Text.reverse` method. See [Example 23-15](#func_descriptor_demo).

##### Example 23-15. Experiments with a method

```
    
```

[![^1]

The `repr` of a `Text` instance looks like a `Text` constructor call that would make an equal instance.

[![^2]

The `reverse` method returns the text spelled backward.

[![^3]

A method called on the class works as a function.

[![^4]

Note the different types: a `function` and a `method`.

[![^5]

`Text.reverse` operates as a function, even working with objects that are not instances of `Text`.

[![^6]

Any function is a nonoverriding descriptor. Calling its `__get__` with an instance retrieves a method bound to that instance.

[![^7]

Calling the function’s `__get__` with `None` as the `instance` argument retrieves the function itself.

[![^8]

The expression `word.reverse` actually invokes `Text.reverse.__get__(word)`, returning the bound method.

[![^9]

The bound method object has a `__self__` attribute holding a reference to the instance on which the method was called.

[![^10]

The `__func__` attribute of the bound method is a reference to the original function attached to the managed class.

The bound method object also has a `__call__` method, which handles the actual invocation. This method calls the original function referenced in `__func__`, passing the `__self__` attribute of the method as the first argument. That’s how the implicit binding of the conventional `self` argument works.

The way functions are turned into bound methods is a prime example of how descriptors are used as infrastructure in the language.

After this deep dive into how descriptors and methods work, let’s go through some practical advice about their use.