# Descriptor Usage Tips

The following list addresses some practical consequences of the descriptor characteristics just described:

Use `property` to keep it simple

The `property` built-in creates overriding descriptors implementing `__set__` and `__get__` even if you do not define a setter method.[^7] The default `__set__` of a property raises `AttributeError: can't set attribute`, so a property is the easiest way to create a read-only attribute, avoiding the issue described next.

Read-only descriptors require `__set__`

If you use a descriptor class to implement a read-only attribute, you must remember to code both `__get__` and `__set__`, otherwise setting a namesake attribute on an instance will shadow the descriptor. The `__set__` method of a read-only attribute should just raise `AttributeError` with a suitable message.[^8]

Validation descriptors can work with `__set__` only

In a descriptor designed only for validation, the `__set__` method should check the `value` argument it gets, and if valid, set it directly in the instance `__dict__` using the descriptor instance name as key. That way, reading the attribute with the same name from the instance will be as fast as possible, because it will not require a `__get__`. See the code for [Example 23-3](#lineitem_class_v4).

Caching can be done efficiently with `__get__` only

If you code just the `__get__` method, you have a nonoverriding descriptor. These are useful to make some expensive computation and then cache the result by setting an attribute by the same name on the instance.[^9] The namesake instance attribute will shadow the descriptor, so subsequent access to that attribute will fetch it directly from the instance `__dict__` and not trigger the descriptor `__get__` anymore. The `@functools.cached_property` decorator actually produces a nonoverriding descriptor.

Nonspecial methods can be shadowed by instance attributes

Because functions and methods only implement `__get__`, they are nonoverriding descriptors. A simple assignment like `my_obj.the_method = 7` means that further access to `the_method` through that instance will retrieve the number `7`—without affecting the class or other instances. However, this issue does not interfere with special methods. The interpreter only looks for special methods in the class itself, in other words, `repr(x)` is executed as `x.__class__.__repr__(x)`, so a `__repr__` attribute defined in `x` has no effect on `repr(x)`. For the same reason, the existence of an attribute named `__getattr__` in an instance will not subvert the usual attribute access algorithm.

The fact that nonspecial methods can be overridden so easily in instances may sound fragile and error prone, but I personally have never been bitten by this in more than 20 years of Python coding. On the other hand, if you are doing a lot of dynamic attribute creation, where the attribute names come from data you don’t control (as we did in the earlier parts of this chapter), then you should be aware of this and perhaps implement some filtering or escaping of the dynamic attribute names to preserve your sanity.

###### Note

The `FrozenJSON` class in [Example 22-5](ch22.html#ex_explore1) is safe from instance attribute shadowing methods because its only methods are special methods and the `build` class method. Class methods are safe as long as they are always accessed through the class, as I did with `FrozenJSON.build` in [Example 22-5](ch22.html#ex_explore1)—later replaced by `__new__` in [Example 22-6](ch22.html#ex_explore2). The `Record` and `Event` classes presented in [“Computed Properties”](ch22.html#computed_props_sec) are also safe: they implement only special methods, static methods, and properties. Properties are overriding descriptors, so they are not shadowed by instance attributes.

To close this chapter, we’ll cover two features we saw with properties that we have not addressed in the context of descriptors: documentation and handling attempts to delete a managed attribute.