# Chapter Summary

The first example of this chapter was a continuation of the `LineItem` examples from [Chapter 22](ch22.html#dynamic_attributes). In [Example 23-2](#lineitem_class_v3), we replaced properties with descriptors. We saw that a descriptor is a class that provides instances that are deployed as attributes in the managed class. Discussing this mechanism required special terminology, introducing terms such as _managed instance_ and _storage attribute_.

In [“LineItem Take #4: Automatic Naming of Storage Attributes”](#auto_storage_sec), we removed the requirement that `Quantity` descriptors were declared with an explicit `storage_name`, which was redundant and error prone. The solution was to implement the `__set_name__` special method in `Quantity`, to save the name of the managed property as `self.storage_name`.

[“LineItem Take #5: A New Descriptor Type”](#new_descr_type_sec) showed how to subclass an abstract descriptor class to share code while building specialized descriptors with some common functionality.

We then looked at the different behaviors of descriptors providing or omitting the `__set__` method, making the crucial distinction between overriding and nonoverriding descriptors, a.k.a. data and nondata descriptors. Through detailed testing we uncovered when descriptors are in control and when they are shadowed, bypassed, or overwritten.

Following that, we studied a particular category of nonoverriding descriptors: methods. Console experiments revealed how a function attached to a class becomes a method when accessed through an instance, by leveraging the descriptor protocol.

To conclude the chapter, [“Descriptor Usage Tips”](#descriptor_usage_sec) presented practical tips, and [“Descriptor Docstring and Overriding Deletion”](#descriptor_doc_del_sec) provided a brief look at how to document descriptors.

###### Note

As noted in [“What’s New in This Chapter”](#whats_new_descriptor_sec), several examples in this chapter became much simpler thanks to the `__set_name__` special method of the descriptor protocol, added in Python 3.6. That’s language evolution!