# Further Reading

Besides the obligatory reference to the [“Data Model” chapter](https://fpy.li/dtmodel), Raymond Hettinger’s [“Descriptor HowTo Guide”](https://fpy.li/23-3) is a valuable resource—part of the [HowTo collection](https://fpy.li/23-4) in the official Python documentation.

As usual with Python object model subjects, Martelli, Ravenscroft, and Holden’s _Python in a Nutshell_, 3rd ed. (O’Reilly) is authoritative and objective. Martelli also has a presentation titled “Python’s Object Model,” which covers properties and descriptors in depth (see the [slides](https://fpy.li/23-5) and [video](https://fpy.li/23-6)).

###### Warning

Beware that any coverage of descriptors written or recorded before PEP 487 was adopted in 2016 is likely to contain examples that are needlessly complicated today, because `__set_name__` was not supported in Python versions prior to 3.6.

For more practical examples, _Python Cookbook_, 3rd ed., by David Beazley and Brian K. Jones (O’Reilly), has many recipes illustrating descriptors, of which I want to highlight “6.12. Reading Nested and Variable-Sized Binary Structures,” “8.10. Using Lazily Computed Properties,” “8.13. Implementing a Data Model or Type System,” and “9.9. Defining Decorators As Classes.” The last recipe of which addresses deep issues with the interaction of function decorators, descriptors, and methods, explaining how a function decorator implemented as a class with `__call__` also needs to implement `__get__` if it wants to work with decorating methods as well as functions.

[PEP 487—Simpler customization of class creation](https://fpy.li/pep487) introduced the `__set_name__` special method, and includes an example of a [validating descriptor](https://fpy.li/23-7).

##### Soapbox

The Design of self

The requirement to explicitly declare `self` as a first argument in methods is a controversial design decision in Python. After 23 years using the language, I am used to it. I think that decision is an example of “worse is better”: a design philosophy described by computer scientist Richard P. Gabriel in [“The Rise of Worse is Better”](https://fpy.li/23-8). The first priority of this philosophy is “simplicity,” which Gabriel presents as:

> The design must be simple, both in implementation and interface. It is more important for the implementation to be simple than the interface. Simplicity is the most important consideration in a design.

Python’s explicit `self` embodies that design philosophy. The implementation is simple—elegant even—at the expense of the user interface: a method signature like `def zfill(self, width):` doesn’t visually match the invocation `label.zfill(8)`.

Modula-3 introduced that convention with the same identifier `self`. But there is a key difference: in Modula-3, interfaces are declared separately from their implementation, and in the interface declaration the `self` argument is omitted, so from the user’s perspective, a method appears in an interface declaration with the same explicit parameters used to call it.

Over time, Python’s error messages related to method arguments became clearer. For a user-defined method with one argument besides `self`, if the user invokes `obj.meth()`, Python 2.7 raised:

TypeError: meth() takes exactly 2 arguments (1 given)

In Python 3, the confusing argument count is not mentioned, and the missing argument is named:

TypeError: meth() missing 1 required positional argument: 'x'

Besides the use of `self` as an explicit argument, the requirement to qualify every access to instance attributes with `self` is also criticized. See, for example, A. M. Kuchling’s famous “Python Warts” post ([archived](https://fpy.li/23-9)); Kuchling himself is not so bothered by the `self` qualifier, but he mentions it—probably echoing opinions from the comp.lang.python group. I personally don’t mind typing the `self` qualifier: it’s good to distinguish local variables from attributes. My issue is with the use of `self` in the `def` statement.

Anyone who is unhappy about the explicit `self` in Python can feel a lot better by considering the [baffling semantics](https://fpy.li/23-10) of the implicit `this` in JavaScript. Guido had some good reasons to make `self` work as it does, and he wrote about them in [“Adding Support for User-Defined Classes”](https://fpy.li/23-11), a post on his blog, _The History of Python_.

[^1]: .

[^2]:  Classes and instances are drawn as rectangles in UML class diagrams. There are visual differences, but instances are rarely shown in class diagrams, so developers may not recognize them as such.

[^3]: .

[^4]:  is devoted to the dynamic configuration of classes, including the concept of metaclasses.

[^5]:  Gamma et al., _Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software_, p. 326.

[^6]: . Highly recommended.

[^7]:  A `__delete__` method is also provided by the `property` decorator, even if no deleter method is defined by you.

[^8]: , results in `AttributeError: 'complex' object attribute 'conjugate' is read-only`. Even the spelling of “read-only” is different.

[^9]: .

[^10]:  Customizing the help text for each descriptor instance is surprisingly hard. One solution requires dynamically building a wrapper class for each descriptor instance.