## Problems with Annotations at Runtime

The increased use of type hints raised two problems:

- Importing modules uses more CPU and memory when many type hints are used.
    
- Referring to types not yet defined requires using strings instead of actual types.
    

Both issues are relevant. The first is because of what we just saw: annotations are evaluated by the interpreter at import time and stored in the `__annotations__` attribute. Let’s focus now on the second issue.

Storing annotations as strings is sometimes required because of the “forward reference” problem: when a type hint needs to refer to a class defined below in the same module. However, a common manifestation of the problem in source code doesn’t look like a forward reference at all: that’s when a method returns a new object of the same class. Since the class object is not defined until Python completely evaluates the class body, type hints must use the name of the class as a string. Here is an example:

```
class
```

Writing forward referencing type hints as strings is the standard and required practice as of Python 3.10. Static type checkers were designed to deal with that issue from the beginning.

But at runtime, if you write code to read the `return` annotation for `stretch`, you will get a string `'Rectangle'` instead of a reference to the actual type, the `Rectangle` class. Now your code needs to figure out what that string means.

The `typing` module includes three functions and a class categorized as [Introspection helpers](https://fpy.li/15-24), the most important being `typing.get_type_hints`. Part of its documentation states:

`get_type_hints(obj, globals=None, locals=None, include_extras=False)`

[…] This is often the same as `obj.__annotations__`. In addition, forward references encoded as string literals are handled by evaluating them in `globals` and `locals` namespaces. […]

###### Warning

Since Python 3.10, the new [`inspect.get_annotations(…)`](https://fpy.li/15-25) function should be used instead of `typing.​get_​type_​hints`. However, some readers may not be using Python 3.10 yet, so in the examples I’ll use `typing.​get_​type_​hints`, which is available since the `typing` module was added in Python 3.5.

[PEP 563—Postponed Evaluation of Annotations](https://fpy.li/pep563) was approved to make it unnecessary to write annotations as strings, and to reduce the runtime costs of type hints. Its main idea is described in these two sentences of the [“Abstract”](https://fpy.li/15-26):

> This PEP proposes changing function annotations and variable annotations so that they are no longer evaluated at function definition time. Instead, they are preserved in _annotations_ in string form.

Beginning with Python 3.7, that’s how annotations are handled in any module that starts with this `import` statement:

```
from
```

To demonstrate its effect, I put a copy of the same `clip` function from [Example 15-14](#ex_clip_annot) in a _clip_annot_post.py_ module with that `__future__` import line at the top.

At the console, here’s what I get when I import that module and read the annotations from `clip`:

```
>>> 
```

As you can see, all the type hints are now plain strings, despite the fact they are not written as quoted strings in the definition of `clip` ([Example 15-14](#ex_clip_annot)).

The `typing.get_type_hints` function is able to resolve many type hints, including those in `clip`:

```
>>> 
```

Calling `get_type_hints` gives us the real types—even in some cases where the original type hint is written as a quoted string. That’s the recommended way to read type hints at runtime.

The PEP 563 behavior was scheduled to become default in Python 3.10, with no `__future__` import needed. However, the maintainers of _FastAPI_ and _pydantic_ raised the alarm that the change would break their code which relies on type hints at runtime, and cannot use `get_type_hints` reliably.

In the ensuing discussion on the python-dev mailing list, Łukasz Langa—the author of PEP 563—described some limitations of that function:

> […] it turned out that `typing.get_type_hints()` has limits that make its use in general costly at runtime, and more importantly insufficient to resolve all types. The most common example deals with non-global context in which types are generated (e.g., inner classes, classes within functions, etc.). But one of the crown examples of forward references: classes with methods accepting or returning objects of their own type, also isn’t properly handled by `typing.get_type_hints()` if a class generator is used. There’s some trickery we can do to connect the dots but in general it’s not great.[^13]

Python’s Steering Council decided to postpone making PEP 563 the default behavior until Python 3.11 or later, giving more time to developers to come up with a solution that addresses the issues PEP 563 tried to solve, without breaking widespread uses of type hints at runtime. [PEP 649—Deferred Evaluation Of Annotations Using Descriptors](https://fpy.li/pep649) is under consideration as a possible solution, but a different compromise may be reached.

To summarize: reading type hints at runtime is not 100% reliable as of Python 3.10 and is likely to change in 2022.

###### Note

Companies using Python at a very large scale want the benefits of static typing, but they don’t want to pay the price for the evaluation of the type hints at import time. Static checking happens at developer workstations and dedicated CI servers, but loading modules happens at a much higher frequency and volume in the production containers, and this cost is not negligible at scale.

This creates tension in the Python community between those who want type hints to be stored as strings only—to reduce the loading costs—versus those who also want to use type hints at runtime, like the creators and users of _pydantic_ and _FastAPI_, who would rather have type objects stored instead of having to evaluate those annotations, a challenging task.